LETTERS DURING 1834.



GENEVA, January, 1834.

MADAME,--I do not know if I had the honour to tell you yesterday that
I might, perhaps, not have the pleasure of dining with you to-day. I
should be in despair if you could think I did not attach an extreme
value to that favour by making you wait for me in vain. Your cousin has
engaged me for Thursday next; I have accepted so as not to seem absurd
in my seclusion. I hope you will see nothing "French" in this sentiment.

I hope this continual rain has not made you sad, and I beg you to
present my most distinguished sentiments to M. Hanski, and accept my
most affectionate homage and obedience.

DE BALZAC.



GENEVA, January, 1834.

MADAME,--Here is the first part of your _cotignacian_ poems. But you
will presently see a man in despair. I do not like to bring you the
Chénier, and yet I hesitate to send it back. Of all that I ordered,
nothing has been done. Binding execrably ugly, covering silly. One
should be there one's self to have things done. If you accept it you
must remember only the good intentions with which I took charge of your
book; that is the only way to give it value.

I have been into town; I made myself joyous; I thought I had found
something that would give you pleasure. I have _deranged_ myself. If
you permit it, I will compensate my annoyance by coming to see you
earlier.

A thousand graceful homages.

HONORÉ

I considered the _cotignac_ so precious I would not delay your
gastronomic joys.



GENEVA, January, 1834.

MADAME,---Will you exchange colonial products? Here is a little of my
coffee. My sister writes that I shall have more to-morrow; therefore,
take this. You shall have your coffee-pot to-morrow. Will you give me
_a little_ tea for my breakfast? I want strictly a little.

Have you passed a good night? Are you well? Have you had good dreams?
I hope your health is good, so that we can go and take a walk [_nous
promener, bromener_]. The treasury? ... _Furth!_



TO HER MAJESTY RZEWUSKIENNE, MME. HANSKA.

GENEVA, January, 1834.

Very dear sovereign, sacred Majesty, sublime queen of Paulowska and
circumjacent regions, autocrat of hearts, rose of Occident, star of the
North, etc., etc., etc., fairy of _tiyeuilles_.[1]

Your Grace wished for my coffee-pot, and I entreat your Serene Highness
to do me the honour to accept one that is prettier and more complete;
and then to tell me, to fling me from your eminent throne a word full
of happiness, amber, and flowers, to let me know if I am to be at Your
sublime door in an hour, with a carriage, to go to Coppet.

I lay my homage at the feet of your Majesty, and entreat you to believe
in the honesty of your humble moujik, HONORESKI.

[Footnote 1: _Bromener_ and _tiyeuilles_ (_tilleuls_ lindens), make fun
of her pronunciation.--TR.]



GENEVA, January, 1834.

Never did an invalid less merit that name. He is ready to go to walk,
to fetch his proofs, and when his business is finished, which will be
in about a quarter of an hour, he will go and propose to Madame _la
doctrice_ to profit by this beautiful day to take an air-bath on the
Crêt of Geneva, along the iron railings; unless the laziness of the
Hanski household concurs with that of the poor literary moujik who lays
at your feet, madame, his strings of imaginary pearls, the treasure of
his heroes, his fanciful Alhambra, where he has carved, everywhere, not
the sacred name of God, but a human name that is sacred in other ways.
But all this immense property may not be worth, in reality, the four
games won yesterday.



GENEVA, January, 1834. I have slept like a dormouse, I feel like a
charm, I love you like a madcap, I hope that you are well, and I send
you a thousand tendernesses.



GENEVA, January, 1834.

If I must come this evening, and dress myself because you have your
_charaders_, permit me to come a little earlier. There is a dinner
here; they are singing and making such a noise while I write that it is
enough to drive the devil away. _Ecco._ I can calculate. Wednesday I
shall be _encandollé_ [dinner with M. de Candolle]. Thursday is taken.
To-morrow I work without intermission, for I shall have proofs. So, out
of five days, when one has but one in prospect, it is no flattery to
add a few hours. Yes? Very good.

Allow me to return your "Marquis" by a good "Maréchale."


GENEVA, January, 1834.

_Willingly_, but you will bring me back to your house, will you
not?--for I can't get accustomed to be two steps away from you, doing
nothing, without better employing my time.

If you go into the town I will ask you to be so kind--No, I will go
myself.



GENEVA, January, 1834.

MADAME,--To a man who considers happy moments as the most profitable
moments of existence, it is permitted to wish not to lose any part of
the sums he amasses. It is only in the matter of joy that I wish to be
Grandet.

If I take this morning the time that you would give me, from three to
ten o'clock, would you refuse me? No? Good. If you love me?--yes--you
will be visible at twelve or one o'clock.

Forgive my avarice; I possess as yet nothing but the happiness which
heaven bestows. Of that I may be avaricious, since I have nothing else.
To you, a thousand affectionate respects, and my obeisances to the
honourable Maréchal of the Ukraine and noble circumjacent regions.



GENEVA, January, 1834.

I cannot come because I am more unwell than I expected to be, and going
out might do me harm. If you would have the kindness to send me back a
little orgeat you would do me a real service, for I don't know what to
drink, and I have a consuming thirst.

I have spent my day very sadly, trying to work, and finding myself
incapable of it. So, I think I shall go to bed in a few hours.

A thousand thanks, and present my respects to the Grand Maréchal.


GENEVA, January, 1834.

MADAME,--If it were not that I get impatient and suffer at losing so
much time, both for that which gives me pleasure and also for my work,
I should be this morning well, and like a man who has had a fever. I
don't know whether I had better go out or keep my room; but I frankly
own that here, alone, I worry horribly.

A thousand thanks for your good care, and forgive me that, yesterday, I
was more surprised than grateful at your visit, which touched me deeply
after you had left. I don't know if you know that there are things that
get stronger as they get older.

A thousand thanks and grateful regards to M. Hanski. How stupid I am
to have made you anxious for so slight a matter; but how happy I am to
know that you have as much friendship for me as I for you.



GENEVA, January, 1834.

My love, this morning I am perfectly well. I was embarrassed yesterday
because there were for you, under the things you moved about, two
letters I send with this.

_Mon Dieu!_ my love, I am afraid that step of yours (your visit to my
room) may be ill taken, and that you exposed the two letters. For other
reasons, _Mon Dieu!_ certainly, I wanted to see you here! I have such
need to cure my cold that if I go out it cannot be till this evening.

I am up; I could not stay in bed longer, I am too uncomfortable. I must
talk or have something to do. Inaction kills me. Yesterday, I spent a
horrible evening thinking of what I had to do. I am this morning like a
man who has had a fever.

A thousand tender caresses. _Mon Dieu!_ how I suffer when I don't see
you. I have a thousand things to tell you.


GENEVA, January, 1834.

What have I done that last evening should end thus, my dear, beloved
Eve? Do you forget that you are my last hope in life? I don't speak
of love, or human sentiments, you are more than all that to me. Why
do you trample under your feet all the hopes of our life in a word?
You doubt one who loves you freely with delights; to whom to feel you
is delirious happiness, who loves you _in æternum_, and you do not
doubt...!

O my love! you play very lightly with a life you chose to have, and
which, moreover, has been given to you with an entire devotion which I
should have given you if you had not demanded it. I like better that
you did wish for it.

I love you with too much constancy that such disputes should not be
mortal to me. _Mon Dieu!_ I have told you the secrets of my life, and
you ought, in return for such unlimited confidence, to spare him who
lives in you the torture of such doubts. You hold me by the hand, and
the day you withdraw that adored hand you alone will know the reason of
what becomes of me.

My beloved Eve, I commit extravagance on extravagance. It is impossible
to think of anything but you. It is not a _desire_, though I have fully
the right to desire pleasure more keenly than other men, and this
desire renders me stupefied at times; no, it is a need to breathe your
air, to see you, and yesterday you gave me eternal memories of beauty.

If I had no sacred pecuniary obligations (and I commit the folly of
forgetting them sometimes), we would not think of the rue Cassini. No.
Yesterday at Diodati I said to myself: "Why should I quit my Eve; why
not follow her everywhere?" I wish it, myself. I accept all sufferings
when I see you; and you, you wounded me yesterday.

But you do not love as I do; you do not know what love is; I, for
my sorrow, have known its delights, and I see that from Neufchâtel
to my death I can reach the end desired through my whole youth, and
concentrate my life and my affections on a single heart!

Dearest, dearest, I am too unhappy from the things of life not to make
it a cruelty in her I love and idolize to cause me a shadow of grief. I
would like better the most horrible of agonies to causing you pain.

Must I come and seek a kiss?



GENEVA, January, 1834.

Your doubts do me harm. You are more powerful than all. Angel of my
life, why should I not follow you everywhere? Because of poverty. _Mon
Dieu_, you have nothing to fear. From the day on which I told you that
I loved you, nothing has altered this delicious life; it is my only
life. Do not dishonour it by suspicions; do not trouble our pleasures.
There was no one before you in my heart; you will fill it forever. Why
do you arm yourself with thoughts of my former life? Do not punish me
for my beautiful confidence. I wish you to know all my past, because
all my future is yours. Break your heart! Sacrifice you to anything
whatever! Why, you don't know me! I am ashamed to bring you sufferings.
I am ashamed not to be able to give you a life in harmony with the
life of the heart. I suffer unheard-of woes, which you efface by your
presence.

Pardon, my love, for what you call my coquetries. Pardon a Parisian
for a simple Parisian talk; but what you will shall be done. I will go
to see no one. Two visits of a quarter of an hour will end all. Perish
a thousand times the society of Geneva rather than see you sad for a
quarter of an hour's conversation. It would be ridiculous (for others)
that I should occupy myself with you only. I was bound to respect you,
and in order to talk to you so much it was necessary that I should
talk with Madame P... Besides, what trifles! Before the Ocean of which
you talk, are you going to concern yourself about a miserable spider?
_Mon Dieu!_ you don't know what it is to love _infinitely_.

What I wrote you this morning is of a nature to show you how false are
your fears. I never ceased to look at you while talking to Madame P...

Ah! dearest, my dear wife, my Eva, I would willingly sell my talent for
two thousand ducats! I would follow you like a shadow. Do you wish to
go back to Wierzchownia? I will follow you and stay there all my life.
But we must have pretexts, and, unfortunate that I am, I cannot leave
Paris without satisfying editors and creditors.

I have received two letters; one from that good Borget, the other from
my sister. Troubles upon troubles. To have at all moments the sight of
paradise and the sufferings of hell,--is that living?



GENEVA, January, 1834.

My love, my only life, my only thought, oh! your letter! it is written
forever on my heart.

Listen, celestial angel, for you are not of this earth. I will reply to
you on these things once for all. Fame, vanity, self-love, literature,
they are scarcely clouds upon our sky. You trample all that twenty
times a day beneath your feet, which I kiss twenty times.

Oh, my angel, see me at your knees as I tell you this: if I have had
the most fugitive of reputations it has come when I did not want it.
I was drunk for it till I was twenty-two. I wanted it as a pharos to
attract to me an angel. I had nothing with which to please; I blamed
myself. An angel came; I let myself suffer in her bosom, hiding from
her my desires for a young and beautiful woman. She saw those desires
and said to me: "When she comes I will be your mother, I will have the
love of a mother, the devotion of a mother."[1]

Then one day the misery of my life grew greater. The toils of night and
day began. She who had offered me, on her knees, her fortune, which I
had taken, which I was returning at the peril of my life, she watched,
she corrected, she refined, as I refined, corrected, watched. Then all
my desires were extinguished in work. It was no longer a question of
fame, but of money. I _owed_, and I had nothing.

Three years I worked without relaxation, having drawn a brass circle
around me from 1828 to 1831. I abhor Madame de C[astries], for she
broke that life without giving me another,--I do not say a comparable
one, but without giving me what she promised. There is not the shadow
of wounded vanity, oh! but disgust and contempt.

You alone have made me know the vanities of fame. When I saw you at
Neufchâtel I wanted to be something. In you then begins, more splendid
than I dreamed it, that dreamed life.

Oh! my Eve, you alone in my life to come!--Alas! like Louis Lambert I
wish that I could give you my past. Thus, nothing that is _success,
fame, Parisian distractions_, moves me. There is but one power that
makes me accept my present life: _Toil_. It calms the exactions of my
fiery temperament. It is because I fear myself that I am chaste.

As for this seclusion that you want, hey! I want it as much as you. It
is not being a fop to tell you that since Neufchâtel three ravishing
women have come to the rue Cassini, and that I did not even cast a
man's glance on seeing them.

My Eve, I love you better than you love me, for I am alone in the
secret of what I lose, and you know nothing of love but the sentiments
of love. Besides, I love you better, for I have more reasons to love
you. If I were free I would live near you, happy to be the steward
of your fortune and the artisan of your wealth, as Madame Carraud's
brother is for Madame d'Argout. I have a security of love, a plenitude
of devotion, which you will only know with time. It needs time to
fathom the infinite. To suffer the whole of life with you, taking a few
rare moments of happiness, yes! To have a lifetime in two years, three,
four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten years, and die, yes! Never to
speak to a woman, to refuse myself to all, to live in you, oh, angel!
but that is my thought at all hours. The ... which I told you about
Madame P... was because she had vexed you, and before your suffering I
became besotted, as you before mine.

_Mon Dieu!_ if we lived together, if I had twenty ducats a month, to
you should belong my poems. I would write books, and read them to
you, and we would burn them in our fire. My adored _minette_, I weep
sometimes in thinking that I sell my ideas, that people read me! Ah!
you do not know what I could be if, free for one evening, I could speak
to you, see you, caress you by my thoughts and by myself. Oh! you would
then know that your thoughts of purity, of exclusive tenderness are
mine. Angel of my life, I live in you, for you, by you. Only, if I am
mistaken, tell me so without anger. There is never any false or bad
intention in me. I obey my heart in all that is sentiment. I have never
known what a calculation is. If I mistake, it is in good faith.

My love, let us never separate. In six months I shall be free. Well,
then, no power on earth can disunite us. _La dilecta_ was forty-six
when I was twenty-two. Why talk about your forty years? We have thirty
years before us. Do you think that at sixty-four a man betrays thirty
years' affection?

What! you think that the opera, the salons, fame can distract me from
you? Then you don't know how I love you. I shall be more angry at that
than you at Madame P... No, believe me, I love you as a woman loves and
as a man loves. In my life to come there is nothing but you and work.
My dear gift, my dear star, my sweet spirit, let yourself be caressed
by hope, and say to yourself that I am not amorous or passionate; all
that passes. I love you, I adore you _in æternum_. I believe in you
as I do in myself. _Mon Dieu!_ I would like to know words which could
infuse into you my soul and my thought, which could tell you that you
are in my heart, in my blood, in my brain, in my thought,--in short,
the life of my life; that each beating of my heart gives birth to
a desire full of thee. Oh! you do not know what are three years of
chastity, which spring at every moment to the heart and make it bound,
to the head and make it palpitate. If I were not sober and did not
work, this purity would drive me mad. I alone am in the secret of the
terrible emotions which the emanations from your dear person give me.
It is an unspeakable delirium which, by turns, freezes my nature by the
omnipotence of desire, and makes me burn. I resist follies like those
of the young seigneur cut down by the Elector.

We have, both of us, our sufferings; do not let us dispute that. Let us
love each other, and do not refuse me that which makes all accepted.
In other respects, in all things, angel, I am submissive to you as to
God. Take my life, ask me to die, order me all things, except not to
love you, not to desire you, not to possess you. Outside of that all is
possible to me in your name.

[Footnote 1: Madame de Berny is meant, and the invention of this letter
is infamous. See letter to Madame Carraud in Appendix, written _at the
same time_ as this spurious letter.--TR]



GENEVA, January, 1834.

If you only knew the superstitions you give me! When I work I put the
talisman on my finger; I put it on the first finger of the left hand,
with which I hold my paper, so that your thought clasps me. You are
there, with me. Now, in seeking from the air for words and ideas,
I ask them of that delicious ring; in it I have found the whole of
"Séraphita."

Love celestial, what things I have to say to you, for which one needs
the sacred hours during which the heart feels the need of baring
itself. The adorable pleasures of love are the only means of arriving
at that union, that fusion of souls. Dear, with what joy I see the
fortunes of my heart and the fate of my soul secured to me. Yes, I will
love you alone and solely through my life. You have all that pleases
me. You exhale, for me, the most intoxicating perfume a woman can have;
that alone is a treasure of love.

I love you with a fanaticism that does not exclude the quietude
of a love without possible storms. Yes, say to yourself well that
I breathe by the air you breathe, that I can never have any other
thought than you. You are the end of all for me. You shall be the young
_dilecta_--already I call you the _pre dilecta_.

Do not murmur at this alliance of the two sentiments. I should like to
think I loved you in her, and that the noble qualities which touched me
and made me better than I was were all in you.

I love you, my angel of earth, as they loved in the middle ages, with
the most complete fidelity, and my love will always be grand, without
stain; I am proud of my love. It is the principle of a new life. Hence,
the new courage that I feel under my last adversities. I would be
greater, be something glorious, so that the crown to place upon your
head should be the most leafy, the most flowery of all those that great
men have nobly won!

Never, therefore, have fear or distrust; there are no abysses in
heaven! A thousand kisses full of caresses; a thousand caresses full of
kisses! _Mon Dieu!_ shall I never be able to make you see how I love
you, you, my Eve!

_À bientôt_; a thousand kisses will be in my first look.



GENEVA, January, 1834.

My loved love, with a single caress you have returned me to life.
Oh! my dearest, I have not been able to either sleep or work. Lost
in the remembrance of that evening, I have said to you a world of
tendernesses. Oh! you have that divine soul to which one remains
attached during a lifetime. My soul, you have, through love, the
delicious language of love which makes all griefs and annoyances
fly away on wings. Loved angel, do not obscure with any doubt the
inspirations of love of which your dear caress is but the interpreter.
Do not think you can ever enter into comparison with any one, no matter
who. But, my loved darling, my flower of heaven, do you not understand,
you, all charm and all truth, that a poor poet can be struck at finding
the same heart, at being loved beyond his hopes? My adored wife, yes,
it was for you that the heart of the most delicate and sweetest woman
that ever was brought me up. I shall be permitted to say to her: "You
wished to be twenty years old to love me better and give me even the
pleasures of vanity. Well, I have met with what you wished me." She
will be joyous for _us_. Dear eternal idol, my beautiful and holy
religion, I know how the memories of another love must wound a proud
and delicate love. But not to speak of it to you would be to deprive
you of nameless fêtes of the soul, and joys of love. There are such
identities of tenderness and soul that I am proud for you, and I know
not if it is you I loved in her. Then, an ungovernable jealousy has so
habituated me to think with open heart, and say all to her in whom I
live, that I could never hide from you a thought. No, you are my own
heart.

Yes, to you all is permitted. I shall tell you naïvely all that I
think that is fine, and all that I think that is bad. You are an I,
handsomer, prettier.

My love has neither exaltation, nor more, nor less, nor anything that
is terrestrial. Oh! my dear Eve, it is the love of the angel always at
the same degree of force, of exaltation. To feel, to touch your hand of
love, that hand of soft, _proud_ sentiments,--do you understand me, my
angel, tender, kind, passionate,--that hand, polished and relaxed of
love, that is a happiness as great as your caress of honey and of fire.

This is what I wished to say to my timid angel, who thought that
all caresses were not _solidaire_. One, the lightest as the most
passionate, comprises all. In that you see to the bottom of my soul. A
kiss on your cherished lips,--those virgin lips that have no souvenirs
yet (which makes you in my eyes as pure as the purest young girl),--a
kiss will be a talisman for the desires of love, when it contains all
the caresses of love. Our poor kiss, still disinherited of all our
joys, only goes to your heart, and I would that it enwrapped all your
person. You would see that possession augments, enlarges love. You
would know your Honoré, your husband; and you would know that he loves
you more daily.

My dearest Eva, never doubt me, but doubt yourself less. I have
told you that there is in you, in your letters, in your love, in
its expression, a something I know not what that is more than in
other letters and expressions that I thought inimitable. But you are
twenty-eight years old,--that is the grand secret. But, dear treasure,
you have the most celestial soul that I know, and you have intoxicating
beauties. _Mon Dieu!_ how shall I tell you that I am drunk at the
faintest scent of you, and that had I possessed you a thousand times
you would see me more intoxicated still, because there would be hope
and memory where now there is only hope.

Do you remember the bird that has but one flower? That is the history
of my heart and my love. Oh! dear celestial flower, dear embalming
perfumes, dear fresh colours, my beautiful stalk, do not bend, guard
me always. At each advance of a love which goes and ever will go on
increasing, I feel in my heart _foyers_ of tenderness and adoration.
Oh! I want to be sure of you as I am of myself. I feel at each
respiration that I have in my heart a constancy that nothing can alter.

I wept on the road to Diodati, when, after having promised me all the
caresses that you have granted me, a woman was able, with a single
word, to cut the woof she seemed to have taken such pleasure in
weaving. Judge if I adore you, you who perceive nothing of these odious
manœuvres, who deliver yourself up with candour and happiness to love,
and who speaks thus to all my natures.

There is my confession made. I think that you have all the noblenesses
of the heart, for, adored angel, one should respect the weakness and
even the crimes of a woman, and if I hide nothing from your heart, it
is that it ought always to be _mine_. So I send you my sister's chatter
and the letter of Madame de C[astries] on condition that you burn all,
my angel. I know you so true, so great; ah! I would not hesitate to
read you the letter of the _dilecta_ if you wish it, for you are really
myself. I would not hide from you the shadow of a thought, and you
ought, at all hours, to enter my heart, as into the palace you have
chosen to spread your treasures in, to adorn it, and find pleasure in
it. All should there be yours.

If Madame C...'s letter displeases you, say so frankly, my love.
I will write to her that my affections are placed in a heart too
jealous for me to be permitted to correspond with a woman who has her
reputation for beauty, for charm, and that I act frankly in telling her
so. I wish to write this letter from myself. I would like well that you
should tell it to me.

As for my money troubles, do not be uneasy about them. It is the basis
of my life, till the end of July, love, which makes everything easy to
me to bear.

Pardon me for having made known to you yesterday's trouble. Oh, dear,
always beautiful flower, I am ashamed to have made you know the extent
of your mission, but you are an inexhaustible treasury of affection, of
love, of tenderness, and I shall always find in you more consolations
than I have troubles. You have put into my thoughts and all my hours a
light, a gleam, which makes me endure all.

I wake up happy to love you; I go to bed happy to be loved. It is the
life of angels; and my despair comes from feeling in it the discord
which my want of fortune and of liberty puts between the desires of
my heart, the impulses of my nature, and the works which keep me in
an ignoble cabin like the moujiks of Paulowska. If I were only at
Paulowska! I would that you were I for a moment to know how you are
loved. Then I would be sure that seeing so much love, so much devotion,
such great security of sentiment, you would never have a doubt, and you
would love _in æternum_ a heart that loves you thus.

A thousand kisses, and may each have in itself a thousand caresses to
you like that of yesterday to me.



GENEVA, January, 1834.

Dear soul of my soul, I entreat you, attach yourself solely--your
cares, your thoughts, your memory--to what will be in my life a
constant thought. Let the piece of malachite become by you alone an
inkstand. I will explain the shape. It should be cut six-sided; the
sides should be about the dimensions of the sides of your card-basket,
except that they ought to end, at the top, squarely, as at the base;
they should go up, enlarging from the base to the top, and, to decide,
logically, the conditions of the stand, the pot for the ink (hollowed
out in the malachite) must have at its surface a diameter equal to this
line [drawn]. The cover, shaped like a _marchepain_, must be round,
and sunk in the pot; it should be simple, and end in a silver-gilt
knob. Let the stand have a handle, fastened on by simple buttons,
and this handle, of bronzed silver-gilt, should be like that of your
card-basket. Have engraved upon it our motto: _Adoremus in æternum_,
between the date of your first letter and that of Neufchâtel.

The inkstand should be mounted on a pedestal, also of six sides,
suitably projecting; and on each side, at the junction of the
pedestal and the stand, there should be, in art-term, a moulding of
silver-gilt, which is simply a round cordon, which must harmonize with
the proportions of the inkstand. Then I think that at the top of the
sides this moulding should be repeated. In the middle of each side of
the pedestal put a star; then, in small letters, in the middle of each
large side, these words: _Exaudit,--Vox,--Angeli_, separated by stars
(which makes "Eva").

If you want to be magnificent you will add a paper-knife of a single
piece of malachite and a powder-pot, the shape of which I will explain
to you.

Not to displease that person I will give him Décamp's drawing which you
can get back, and I will ask him, in exchange, for a piece of malachite
for my alarm-clock.

Here is Susette. I can only say that this will make me renounce the
pleasure of making you pick up on the shores of the lake the pebbles
I intended to have made into an alarm-clock. I went, yesterday, to
see if we could walk along the shore. I wanted to connect you with
these souvenirs, to make you see that one can thus enlarge life and
the world, and have the right to surround you with my thought through
a thousand things, as I would like to surround myself with yours. Thus
sentiment moulds material objects and gives them a soul and a voice.

What! _bébête_, did you not guess that the dedication was a surprise
which I wished to give you? You are, for longer than you think, the
thought of my thought.

Yes, I shall try to come to-night at nine.



GENEVA, January 19, 1834.

My loved angel, I am almost mad for you, as one is mad. I cannot put
two ideas together that you do not come between them. I can think of
nothing but you. In spite of myself my imagination brings me back to
you. I hold you, I press you, I kiss you, I caress you; and a thousand
caresses, the most amorous, lay hold upon me.

As to my heart, you will always be there, _willingly_; I feel you there
deliciously. But, _mon Dieu!_ what will become of me if you have taken
away my mind. Oh! it is a monomania that frightens me. I rise every
moment, saying to myself, "Come, I'll go there!" Then I sit down again,
recalled by a sense of my obligations. It is a dreadful struggle. It is
not life. I have never been like this. You have consumed the whole of
me. I feel stupefied and happy when I let myself go to thinking of you.
I roll in a delicious revery, where I live a thousand years in a moment.

What a horrible situation. Crowned with love, feeling love in all my
pores, living only for love, and to find oneself consumed by grief and
caught in a thousand spider's-webs.

Oh! my dearest Eva, you don't know. I have picked up your card; it
is there, before me, and I speak to it as if you were there. I saw
you yesterday, beautiful, so admirably beautiful. Yesterday, all the
evening, I said to myself, "She is mine!" Oh! the angels are not as
happy in Paradise as I was yesterday.



GENEVA, February, 1834.

MADAME,--Bautte [chief clock-maker in Geneva] is a great seigneur who
is bored by small matters; and as you deign to attach some importance
to the chain of your slave, I send you the worthy Liodet, who will
understand better what is wanted, and will put more good-will into
doing it. I have told him to put a link to join the two little chains.

Accept a thousand compliments, and the respectful homage of your moujik,

HONORÉ.



GENEVA, February, 1834.

The Sire de Balzac is very well indeed, madame, and will be, in a few
moments, at your fireside for a chat; he is too avaricious of the few
moments that remain to him to spend in Geneva, and if he had not had
some letters to answer, he would have gone there already this morning.
A thousand affectionate compliments to M. Hanski, and to you a thousand
homages full of friendship.



PARIS, Wednesday, February 12, 1834.

I prefer saying nothing more than that. I love you with increasing
intoxication, with a devotion that difficulties increase, to telling
you imperfectly my history for the last three days. Sunday I will post
a complete journal. I have not a minute to myself. Everything hurries
me at once, and time presses. But, adored angel, you will divine me.

The _dilecta_ [Madame de Berny] is better, but the future seems bad to
me. I wait still before despairing.

_Mon Dieu!_ may my thoughts of love echo in your ears and cradle you.



PARIS, Thursday, February 13, 1834.

MADAME,--I arrived much fatigued, but I found troubles at home, of
which you can conceive the keenness. Madame de Berny is ill, and
seriously ill,--more ill than she is aware of. I see in her face a
fatal change. I hide my anxiety from her; it is boundless. Until my own
doctor or a somnambulist reassure me, I shall not feel easy about that
life which you know to be so precious.

I have delayed a day in writing to you, because on Wednesday morning
I had to rush to the rue d'Enfer, and when I could write to you there
was no longer time; the public offices closed earlier on account of
Ash-Wednesday.

The sight of that face so gracious, aged in a month by twenty years,
and horribly contracted, has greatly increased the grief I felt. Even
if the health is restored, and I hope it, it will be always painful
to me to see the sad change to old age. I can say this only to you.
It seems as if nature had avenged herself suddenly, in a moment, for
the long protestation made against her and time. I hope most ardently
that the life may be saved; but I recognized symptoms that I saw with
horror in my father before the irreparable loss. So, I have sorrow
upon sorrow.[1] Now, after confiding to you these distresses, I can,
madame, give you some consoling news. The publisher has understood my
delay, and is not angry with me. I have, certainly, to work enormously,
but, at least, I shall not have the annoyance of being blamed. As
for M. Gosselin, that is only a loss of money. So, you who felt such
affectionate fears lest the prolongation of my stay would prove a
burden may be reassured. I shall have had complete joy, and no remorse;
and now that there is no remorse, I should like a little. It is so
sweet to bear something for those whose friendship is precious to us.
I can tell you from afar, with less trembling in my voice and redness
in my eyes, that the forty-four days I spent in Geneva have been one
of the sweetest halts that I have made in my life of a literary
foot-soldier. That rest was necessary for me, and you have made it into
a joy. It was a sleep with the sweetest dreams,--dreams which will be
realities. True friendship, sweet, kind, noble and good sentiments are
so rare in life that there must mingle a little gratitude in the return
we owe, and I feel as much gratitude as friendship.

I shall forget nothing of our affectionate little agreements: neither
the album, nor the coffee, nor anything. To-day I can only tell you
that I arrived without any hindrance, except great fatigue. The cold
was keen. Saturday morning I crossed the Jura on foot through the
snow, and on reaching the stone where two years ago I sat down to look
at the wonderful spectacle of France and Switzerland separated by a
brook, which is the Lake of Geneva, and a ditch, which is the valley
between the Mont Blanc and the Jura, I had a moment of joy mingled
with sadness. Two years ago I wept over lost illusions [refers to his
rupture with Mme. de Castries], and to-day I had to regret the sweetest
things that have ever come to me, outside of family feelings,--hours of
friendship, the value of which a poor writer from necessity must feel
more keenly than others, because there is in him a great poet for all
that is emotion of the heart.

Yes, I am proud of my personal feelings, but it is a great grief to
know the joys of friendship to their full extent, and lose them, even
momentarily.

To-day I replunge into work, and it is crushing. I have promised that
the second Part of the "Études de Mœurs" shall appear February 25th.
That is only ten days for completing you know how much. My punctuality
must excuse the delays. You see that in writing I am as indiscreet as
when I went to see you.

Well, adieu, madame; believe that I am not "French" in the matter of
memory, and that I know all that I leave of good and true beyond the
Jura. In the hours when I am worn-out I shall think of our evenings;
and the word _patience_, written in the depths of my life, will make me
think of our games. You know all that I would say to the Grand Maréchal
of the Ukraine, and I am certain that my words will be more graceful
from your lips than from my pen. Tell Anna that _her horse_ sends her
his remembrances and kisses her forehead. A thousand affectionate
compliments to Mademoiselle Séverine; inform Mademoiselle Borel that
I have _not_ broken my neck, and keep, I entreat you, madame, at your
feet, my most sincere and most affectionate homage; your noble beauty
assures you of sincerity, and as to the affection, I wish I could prove
it to you in some way that would not involve misfortune.

"Do not forget _to-morrow_," was one of your recommendations when I
told you that I did not believe in morrows; but now I do believe in
them, for, by chance, I have a future, and my publisher has proved it
to me. He is jubilant at the sale of "Eugénie Grandet," and said to me
solemnly, "It sells like bread." I tell this to you who think you see
cakes in it, while most people expect to see me _faire brioches_ of it
[fiasco]. Excuse this studio jest, you who like artists.

Devotion and friendship.

[Footnote 1: Madame de Berny was the friend of his parents, and
twenty-four years older than himself. When the family lived at
Villeparisis the de Bernys lived near them in a hired house, their
own estate being at Saint-Firmin. Madame de Berny recognized Balzac's
genius in his early youth, when parents and friends denied it. For a
time, while at Villeparisis, he taught her son with his own brother
Henry. When Balzac's father opposed his literary career, it was she
who, with Mme. Surville and her husband, induced the old man to advance
him part of his inheritance for the printing-office, and later another
portion to avoid bankruptcy. When the crisis came, in 1828, and his
father would do no more for him, Madame de Berny lent him money from
time to time to meet his load of business debts. The total amount lent
by her, at five per cent interest, was 45,000 francs, the last 6,000
of which he paid in full in 1836. Madame de Berny had cruel trials of
her own. Two of her children were insane, one idolized son and two
daughters died before her in the prime of their youth. The illness here
mentioned was one form of heart disease, from which she rallied for
a time, but died in July, 1836, in the sixty-first year of her age.
Of Balzac's grief at this event his sister says: "My brother was then
(1836) overwhelmed by a great heart-sorrow ... the death of a person
very dear to him.... I have never read anything so eloquent as his
expression of that grief."

Writing, himself, to a friend at that time, he says: "She whom I have
lost was more than a mother, more than a friend, more than any creature
can be to another creature. I can explain her only by divinity. She
sustained me during great storms by words, by actions, by devotion.
If I live, it was through her. She was all to me; and though for the
last two years illness and lapse of time had separated us, yet we were
visible to each other from a distance. She re-acted upon me. She was,
as it were, my moral sun. Madame de Mortsauf in the _Lys_ is a pale
expression of her noble qualities; it is but a distant reflection of
her, for I have a horror of prostituting my own emotions."--TR.]



PARIS, February 15, 1834, eleven o'clock.

My darling Eva, to you belongs this part of my night. Since Wednesday
morning of this week I have been like a balloon; but as I went and
came, and bustled through this Paris, I walked along, exciting myself
with one fixed idea,--the idea of being forever near to you.

My dear idol, I have never had so much courage in my life; or rather,
I have a new life. I read your name in me, I see you; everything seems
easy to me to attain to seeing you again. I am afraid of nothing. My
tears, my regrets, my sadness of love,--all that falls upon my heart
at the moment when I get into bed. Then, alone with myself, I am all
grief not to be at the "Arc," not to have seen my darling, and I go
over in memory the smallest details of those days when, for all grief,
I had that of being waked three hours too soon, hours that separated my
rising from the moment when I set out to go to you.

The next day I work with an ardour of enthusiasm. What shall I tell
you of these four days? I had to see two editors (they came) and
the printer, to finish my proofs, to nurse Mme. de Berny, who is
better,--but what a change! she is still a little feeble, incapable of
correcting my proofs. Everything will suffer for that, but what does it
matter? I want to see that life out of danger.

I felt there how I loved you. A horrible sensation told me that I could
not bear any danger to you. All that recalled my terror at the time of
your nervous attack. Oh, _mon Dieu!_ to see you seriously ill, you,
who sum up and hold all my affections in your heart, my life in your
life,--why! I should die, not of your death, but of your sufferings.
No, you do not know what you are to me. Near you, I feel too much to
tell you egotistical thoughts; here I talk to you all day long. You are
woven into my thought. I find no word but that to express my situation.
As soon as I found myself in Paris I thought of the means of going to
see you for a single day in Geneva.

Here I find violent family troubles. To-day I have had my
brother-in-law and my mother to dinner. That tells you that from five
o'clock to half-past ten I have been given up to them. Yesterday I had
to dine with my sister, my mother, and my brother-in-law; then I was
forced to give them from four to eleven o'clock. Those poor heads are
distracted. I must have courage, ideas, energy, _economy_ for all of
them.

The morning of this Friday I set myself to learn all that has happened
here. I had to go out early, to see the doctor, negotiate a payment
for to-day, 15th, and consult him. So you see the employment of to-day
and yesterday. Thursday was taken up by the publishers, a little
sleep and a bath, also by Madame de Berny, to whom I wished at any
rate to read "Ne touchez pas à la hache." Wednesday, the day after my
arrival, I wrote you in the evening, I ran about all the morning, set
my affairs in order, attended to a thousand little things,--which I
don't particularize, as they are all mere necessary nothings,--made up
my accounts, wrote, etc. After this avalanche of small things here I
am, not much rested, rather less anxious about the _dilecta_, before a
pile of proofs and enormous debts for the end of the month. Madame D...
has urgent need of half her money by the end of February. It is now the
15th, the month is a short one, I must finish my two volumes; I must
finish "Ne touchez pas" and write "La Femme aux yeux rouges."

My adored, my darling _minette_, I tell you things that are terrifying,
but do not be alarmed. Vienna is traced out before me; all will be
well. Your desire to see me, your love, all _you_ hovers above me. I
believe in you only; I want new successes, new fame, new courage; I
_will_ in short, that you shall be a thousand times prouder of your
husband of love than of your lover. Yes, dear celestial Eva, I am
melancholy because I am here and you are down there, but I have no
more discouragements, no more depressions. When I raise my eyes I see
something better than God, I see a sure happiness, a tried happiness.
Oh! you do not know, my treasure, my dear life, what such sweet
certainty is to my soul. You don't know what you did with your infernal
jesting, you remember? You tried upon a most loving heart a weapon you
did not know was loaded. A moment more, and I was lost. My eternal
love could be placed on you alone; I see it, I know it now, for now I
desire you more than ever. My dearest soul, I have for myself all the
efforts that I make to meet you again; I materialize my hope. But, my
beautiful myself, you, what are you doing? Ah! my beautiful, saintly
creature, I know it is not on him of Paris that the burden is heaviest;
it is our Geneva love, it is you who, bearing all our happiness, feel
most our pains, our sorrows. Neither do I ever look _at us two_ without
a smile full of hope, but also slightly tainted with sadness. Oh! my
idolized angel, you in whom all my future resides, all my happiness,
and for whom I desire all the fine glories that make a happy woman, you
whom I love with all the ardour of a young sentiment, of a first and a
last love in one, yes, know it well, no sufferings, ideas, joys, which
can agitate your soul fail to come and agitate mine.[1]

At this moment when I write to you, having left all to plunge into
your heart, to come nearer to you, no, I feel space no longer; we are
near one to the other; I see you, and one of my senses is intoxicated
by the memory of one of those little voluptuous moments which made me
so happy! I am very proud of you. I cry out to myself that I love you!
You see, a poet's love has a little madness in it. None but artists are
worthy of women, because they are somewhat women too. Oh! what need I
have always to hear myself told that I am loved, to hear you repeat
it! You, you are all. You will know only when you hear my voice how
ardently I tell you that you are the only well-beloved, the only wife.
Now I shall rush there more amorously than the two preceding times.
You know why, my dear, naïve wife? Because I know you better, because
I know all there is of divine and girlish in your dear, celestial
character, because--. No, I never dreamed so ambitiously the perfections
that are agreeable to me because I know that I can love ever. Going
to Neufchâtel I _wanted to_ love you; returning from Geneva it is
impossible not to love you!

Who will ever know what the road to Ferney is at the spot where, having
to leave on the morrow, I stood still at the sight of your dear,
saddened face. _Mon Dieu!_ if I tried to tell you all the thoughts
there are in my soul, the voluptuous pleasures which my heart contains
and desires, I should never cease writing, and, unfortunately, the word
"Vienna" is there. I am cruel to both of us in the name of a continued
happiness; yes, _one year_ passed together will prove to you that you
can be better loved each day, and I aspire to September...

My dearest, I have many griefs; this flaming happiness is surrounded by
briars, thorns, stones. I cannot speak to you of family troubles; they
are endless. You will know them from one word, you who feel through
a sister what, in another order of things, I feel through my mother.
My mother has committed, with good intentions, follies that bring a
person into disrepute. Here am I, I, so busy, forced to undertake the
education of my mother, hold her in check, make a child of her.[2] Dear
angel, what a sad thing to think that if the world has accumulated
obstacles in my life, my family have done worse in being of no use to
me, and secretly hampering me. One day or other the world counts us as
a victor to have beaten it. But family griefs are between _us_ and God.

I told Borget that September would see me in Vienna, and a whole year
in the Ukraine and the Crimea, and you know I wrote him that he could
meet you in Italy. I send you a scrap of a letter from that excellent
friend; it will please you; you will see in it that nobility of soul,
that beauty of sentiment, that make us love him. What rush of love
he has to those who love his friend! But do not go and love him too
much, _Madame_. He will take to you _your chain_, the sketches of my
apartment, and your seal, if it is done, without knowing what he hands
to you. So tell me the day you will be in Venice; he will go there. He
is my Thaddeus, you see. What he does for me, I should do for him. One
is never jealous of fine sentiments. As much as _death_ entered cold
into your husband's heart when you spoke of a coquetry to Séverine, so
much should I go joyously to accomplish in your name a service to your
Thaddeus.

From to-day, Sunday, I shall write to you every day a word, on a little
diary. Yes, the Würtemberg Coquebin shall alone touch the manuscript
of "Séraphita," which will be coarsely bound in the gray cloth which
slipped so easily on the floors. Am I not a little of a woman, hey,
_minette_? Have I not found a pretty use for what you wanted destroyed,
and a souvenir? Nothing can be more precious, or simpler. Book of
celestial love, clothed in love and in joys terrestrial as complete as
it is possible to have here below. Yes, angel, complete, full! Yes, my
ambitious one, you fill all my life! Yes, we can be happy every day,
feeling every day new joys.

_Mon Dieu!_ Friday at dinner I saw in my sister's home one of those
scenes which prove that inspired love, that jealous love, that nothing
in Paris can resist continued poverty. Oh! dear angel, what a terrible
reaction in my heart, thinking of the little home in the rue Cassini.
How I swore to myself then, with that iron will, never to expose the
flowers of my life to be in the brown pot in which were the pinks of
Ida's mother,--you know, in "Ferragus." No, no, I never could have that
experience, for never shall I forget the 14th of February, 1834, any
more than the 26th of January; there is a lesson in it for me. Yes, I
want too much; there exists in my being an invincible need to love you
always better, that I may never expose my love to any misunderstanding.
Oh, my heart, my soul, my life, with what joy I recognize at every
step that I love you as you dream of being loved. The most indifferent
things enter into this circumference.

No, your young girl's chain shall remain pure. I would like to employ
it. It is too pretty for a man. That is why I wanted your head by
Grosclaude. What a delicious border I could have made of it, and what
a delicious thought to surround you, you, my dear wife, with all the
superstitions of your childhood which I adore. Your childhood was mine.
We are brothers and sisters through the sorrows of childhood.

There is one of your smiles of happiness, a ravishing little
contraction, a paleness that takes you at the moment of joy, which
returns to stab me with intoxicating memories. Oh! you do not know with
what depth you correspond to the caprices, the loves, the pleasures,
the poesies, the sentiments of my nature!

Come, adieu. Think, my beloved, that at every instant of the day a
thought of love surrounds you; that a light more brilliant and secret
gilds your atmosphere; that my thought is all about you; that my
interior eyes see you; that a constant desire caresses you; that I work
in your name and for you. Take good care of yourself; and remember
that the only serious order that is given to you by him who loves you
and whom you have told me you wished to obey is to _walk_ a great deal
whatever the weather may be. You must. Ah! the doctor laughed at my
fears. Nevertheless, there are baths to be taken, and some precautions,
"fruits of my excessive labour," he said. "So long as you lead your
chaste, monkish life and work your twelve hours a day, take every
morning an infusion of _wild pansy_." Isn't his prescription droll?

You know all the caressing desires that I send you. Well, I hope that
every Wednesday you will know how to draw my letter from the claws
of the post. From now till the end of the month I shall work only my
twelve hours, sleep seven, and spread out the five others in rest,
reading, baths, and the bustle of life. Your Bengali is wise. Well, a
thousand flowers of the soul. All reflection made, I shall send your
ostensible letter by Borget.

[Footnote 1: This ridiculous stuff is carefully translated word for
word. The reader must make what he can of it. It is ludicrous to
suppose that Balzac ever wrote those vapourings of a shop-boy to his
female kind.--TR.]

[Footnote 2: His whole correspondence, and all that we know and can
gather of his life go to prove that he never could have written
this. His family then consisted of his mother and Mme. Surville. His
affection for M. and Mme. Surville appears in every part of his life.
His mother seems to have been at times irritating, and very injudicious
with him, but not in the way suggested. At one period he intrusted her
with all his affairs, and she was his business agent. He shows in his
life and writings a strong respect for the Family bond, and his last
letter to his mother is signed "Ton fils soumis"--"Your submissive
son."--TR.]



PARIS, February 17--February 23, 1834.

No letter to-day, my dearest Eve. _Mon Dieu!_ are you ill? What
tortures one has at such a distance! If you are ill, and they have
taken your letters! A thousand thoughts enter my brain and make me
desperate.

To-day I work much, but get on little. To-morrow I am forced to go
and dine with M. de Margonne, the lord of Saché. Nevertheless, I get
up at half-past one in the morning and go to bed at half-past six. My
habits of work are resumed and the fatigues of toil; but I bear them
well. I find unheard-of difficulties in doing well what I have to do
at this moment. At every instant of the day my thought flies to you. I
have mortal fears of being less loved. I adore you with such complete
abandonment! I have such need of knowing myself loved! I can be happy
only when I receive a letter from you, not every day, but every two
days. Your letters refresh my soul; they cast into it celestial balm.

You cannot doubt me; I work night and day, and every line brings me
nearer to you. But you, my beloved angel, what are you doing? You
are idle; you still see a little company. _Mon Dieu!_ what ties are
between us! They will not break, say! You do not know how much I am
attached to you by all the things that you thought would detach me.
There is not only ungovernable love, passions, happiness, pleasures,
there is also, from me to you, I know not what profound esteem of moral
qualities. Your mind will always please me; your soul is strong; you
are fully the _wife_ I desire for mine. I go over deliciously within
me those forty-five days, and everything proves to me that I am right
in my love. Yes, I can love you always; always hold out to you a hand
full of true affection and receive you in a heart that is always full
of you. I like to speak to you of your superiority because it is real.
Every sound your soul gives out is grand, strong, and true. I am very
happy through you in thinking that you have all the qualities which
perpetuate attachment in life.

My dear flower of love, I wrote in my last letter that I wished you to
walk; but I wish more, I also wish you to give up coffee _au lait_ and
tea. I wish you to obey me, and I desire that you shall only eat dark
meats. Above all, that you bring yourself gradually to using cold water
when you dress. Will you not do all that when it is asked of you in
the name of love? Do not depart in any way from that regimen. As for
walking, begin by short walks and increase every day till you can do
six miles on foot. Take your walk fasting, getting up, and coming back
to breakfast on a little meat, but dark and always roasted. If you love
me you will manage yourself in this way with a constancy that nothing
hinders. Then your beauty will remain the same; you will get slightly
thinner, your health will be good, and you will prevent many illnesses.
Oh! I implore you, follow this regimen, and when you are near the sea
take sea-baths. You do not know how I love you.


Tuesday, 18.

Still no letter; what anguish! I have just returned from Madame de
C[astries], whom I do not want for an enemy when my book comes out,
and the best means of obtaining a defender against the faubourg
Saint-Germain is to make her approve of the work in advance; and she
greatly approved of it. I carried to Madame Appony Madame Potoçka's
letter. The ambassadress [of Austria] was at her toilet; I did not see
her, and, on the whole, I am content; I do not want to be disturbed, I
wish to go nowhere, and the singular idea has come to me of shaving my
head like a monk so as to be unable to go out of the house. I have to
go to a ball Saturday at Dablin's; he has done me services, and I am
forced to have some gratitude.

Do you know there is some question of my taking my mother, sister,
and brother-in-law to live here? I await a family council upon it. I
see many inconveniences; the lessening of my liberty, though nothing
would prevent my going to the Ukraine and Vienna and absenting myself
two years. But, for the last two days, my reason tells me to refuse
this union; and yet it is the only means to prevent my mother from
committing follies. What vexations and impediments! I have worked
little to-day and have rushed about much.


Wednesday, 19.

Furious work. The "Duchesse de Langeais" costs me more than I can
tell you. In my opinion it is colossal in work, but it will be little
appreciated by the crowd. My publisher refuses me any money for my
month's bills; here I am constrained to a thousand annoying efforts,
and shall I succeed? he is right; he represents Madame Bêchet, and
tells me he can't ask her to pay in advance; the new Part must
absolutely be brought out. So I send you a thousand tendernesses. Here,
reading this line, you must think that the heart of your lover was
full of love, that he had _need_ to write to you a thousand gracious
things, but that he must be silent and work! Till to-morrow.


Thursday, 20, five o'clock.

My mother, sister, and brother-in-law are coming to dinner to talk
over affairs. I have worked since one hour after midnight till three
hours after midday without leaving off. Now, angel of mine, decidedly
you will shudder, you will palpitate, when you read the "Duchesse de
Langeais," for it is the greatest thing in women that I have so far
done. No woman of this Faubourg resembles her.

You have a thousand thoughts of love, a thousand caresses, a thousand
prettinesses. I think of you and your pleasure when I hear my name
uttered gloriously everywhere. I wish to become great for a sentiment
greater still.

Till to-morrow. A kiss to the wife, a little _pigeonnerie_ to Eve. A
thousand souls for you in my soul.


Friday, 21.

I have your letter, the second letter written to your dearest one. _Mon
Dieu!_ how I love you! The thousand desires, the hopes of happiness
which fired my heart at each turn of the wheel as I went to Neufchâtel,
the certain delights that I went to find in Geneva and which made you
sublime, ravishing, in short a wife, forever mine,--well, I have felt
all those divers emotions once more, augmented by dear joys, by the
adorable security of an angel in his sky.

Oh! my love, what rapid wings have borne me near to you! Yes, my
thought has kissed your magnificent forehead, my heart has been in your
heart, my thought in your beautiful hair, and my mouth--I dare not say,
but certainly it breathed love and kissed you with unheard-of ardour.
Oh! dear Eve, dear treasure of happiness, dear, noble soul, dear
light, dear world, my only happiness, how shall I tell you fully that
I felt there that I loved you _in æternum_? I ought to have read that
letter on my knees before your portrait! What courage you communicate
to me!

_Eh bien_, I am glad at what you inform me of. To have it so, it must
be the fruit of conscientious thought. Oh! dear darling, I want that
this other _you_, this other _we_, well, I wish he may have all that
can flatter the vanities of a mother, that he may be tall, that he
have your forehead, my energy, that he be handsome and noble, a great
heart and a fine soul. For all that, wisdom! At Vienna, my love, at
Vienna, we will try. What delights in chastity, in fame, in work that
has an object. Fidelity, fame, toil, all that for a woman, one only,
for her whose love shines already upon me for all my life. Yes, Eva,
Eva of love, my beautiful and noble mistress, my pretty, naïve servant,
my great sovereign, my fairy, my flower, yes, you light all things!
Persist in your projects; be a woman as superior in your conduct as you
are in your plans. Be as strong in your house as you are in your love.

Oh! your letters, they ravish me, they stir me; oh! you make me dote
upon you! What a soul, what a heart, what a dear mind! You crown
my ambitions, and yesterday I was saying to Mme. de B... that you
were--you, the unknown of Geneva and Neufchâtel--the realization of the
ambitious programme I had made of a woman.

Ah! my love, it is something, after the triumph that all women desire
to obtain over the senses and the heart of their lovers, to obtain also
the complete and entire assurance that they are admired from afar,
that we can always esteem them, cherish them, take pleasure beside
them. Such as you have seen me near you, such I shall ever be. To you
all my smiles, to you the flowers of heart and love, inexhaustible in
their bloom. To you the candour and freshness of my sentiments, to
you all. To you, who understand the mind, the gaiety, the melancholy,
the grandeur, the transports of the ever diverse love of a poet! Oh! I
stop, kissing your eyes.

To-morrow I rush, about; I have tiresome business matters; but this
is the last time. I shall finish at one blow the difficulty about the
"Physiologie du Mariage," and by the end of March I shall not owe a
sou to Madame Delannoy. After? Well, I shall resume work to accomplish
the rest. I tell you nothing of these tramps, but they take much time,
weary me, exhaust me, and my love, as much as necessity, cries to me
every morning, "March!"

My love, my Eve, night and day I go to sleep and wake in your heart,
in your thought. To suffer, to work for you, these are pleasures. Till
to-morrow.


Saturday, 22.

I have just received your ostensible letter and have answered it. I
spoke _stupidly_ of your chain, but I have not the heart to throw the
letter into the fire and write it over again. I am tired. To-night I
must go to a ball; I, at a ball! But, my love, I must. It is at the
house of the only friend who has ever gallantly served me. I will
send you the pattern of a chain, that of Vaucanson; have it made
solid, and Liodet can send it to me and draw on me for the cost. Tell
me if bronze-gilt things can enter Russia. I have had an admirable
three-branched candelabrum made here, and I should like to send you
one; also an inkstand and an alarm-clock (a very useful thing to a
woman), in short, all that I use here to be the same with you. If I had
been richer do you think I would not have substituted to you a chain
like yours and taken yours, in order that you might say to yourself
while playing with it, "He plays with that chain!" But I can make such
joys for ourselves later. Answer me about the bronze, because I want
you to have that masterpiece before your eyes. Think, what happiness to
see as you write to me, _Exsultat vitam angelorum_, which I shall see
in writing to you. Oh! I am greedy, hungry for such things, which put
two lovers unceasingly in each other's hearts! I shall have your room
at Wierzchownia made just like mine here. I want you to have the same
carpet.

Oh! I adore you. Just now I wept on thinking of the floor of your house
in Geneva. How lucky to have the strength not to cough! These tears
have told me that I shall be at Vienna, September 10, and that I shall
press you, happy one, on this heart that is all yours.

_Bébête_, in ten years you will be thirty-seven and I forty-five, and,
at that age we can love, marry, and adore each other for a lifetime.
Come, my noble companion, my dear Eve, never any doubts,--you have
promised me. Love with confidence. Séraphita is we two. Let us spread
our wings with the same movement, and love in the same way. I adore
you, looking neither before nor behind. _You_ are the present, all my
happiness at every moment.

Do not be jealous of Madame P...'s letter; that woman must be _for us_.
I have flattered her, and I want her to think that you are disdained.
All that I read you in the "Duchesse de Langeais" has been changed. You
will read a new book.

Dear angel, no, we will never quit the sphere of happiness where you
have made me a happiness so complete. Love me always, you will see me
always happy; oh, my life, oh, my beautiful life! Here, I no longer
know what an annoyance is in seeing my whole life ardent with one sole
love. Tell me what you are doing. Your visit to Genthod delighted me.
Never let any woman bite you without biting her deeper. They will fear
you and esteem you.

Thanks for the violet; but an end of white ribbon would please me
better; it has no longer any smell. I send you a violet from my garden.



Sunday, 23.

Adieu, soul of my soul; will this letter tell you how you are loved?
Will it tell it to you really? No; never really. _Il faut mes coups de
bec là où est l'amour_.

I hope to finish my volume this week. You will receive it in Geneva. I
will attend to your orders, and do blindly what you tell me. But write
_names_ legibly in all business.

Would you believe that two young men dined with me yesterday and
told me that several men, two of them friends of theirs, said _they
were I_ at the [masked] ball at the Opera, and obtained the favours
of well-bred women while I was at Geneva, and that I have been thus
calumniated. There are women who boast they have been mine, and that
they come to me, to me, who see only _la dilecta_, who receive nobody,
who want to live in your heart! I learned that last night.

Well, adieu my love; no, not adieu, but _à bientôt_, at Vienna, _cara
mia_, my treasure. I have to work horribly, still; seven or eight
proofs to a sheet. Ah! you will never know what the volume you will
soon read has cost.

I hope to be in funds for my payments; I hope that on March 25th the
third Part will appear. So, all goes well. I lose five hundred francs
more by Gosselin, but pooh! The violet will tell you a thousand things
of love. The Würtemberg Coquebin will bind "Séraphita" marvellously
with the gray cloth; do you understand, treasure?

I go to-day at three o'clock to Madame Appony. Perhaps I shall wish to
go to Madame Potoçka of Paris. I will speak to you of that.



PARIS, March 2, 1834.

My salvation! For my salvation! No, let me believe that between the two
persons of whom you are thinking and me, you have not hesitated, you
have condemned me. At least, there is in that all the grandeur of true
love.

I was working night and day to go to you. Now I shall certainly work
as much, for it is not possible for me to take the slightest resolution
till my mother is physically happy. I have still a year to suffer.

Let us say no more of me. So you have been cruelly agitated? A
sentiment which gives such remorse was feeble, and it is my heart that
was blamed!--I, to whom _adoremus in æternum_ meant something!

Fate is about to take from me a true affection, and to-day I lose all
my beliefs in happiness, without anything being able to disengage me
from myself. Ah! you have not known me! All those who have suffered
forgive, you know. I shall stay as I am; I cannot change. You said
yourself: "The Jules women love faithfully, in spite of desertion."
Am I therefore not a man? Is this another test? It costs me more than
life; it costs me my courage.

I cannot oppose to this blow either disdain, contempt, or any of the
egotistical sentiments that console. I remain in my stupor, without
understanding. Ah! I knew not that I was writing for myself: _To
wounded hearts, silence and, shade_.

_Mon Dieu!_ my book is finished; I am not rich enough to destroy it,
but I lay it at your knees, begging you not to read it: Eve should not
open a book in which is the "Duchesse de Langeais." You might, though
certain of the entire devotion of him who writes to you, be wounded,
as one is pricked by bushes. I shall always weep at being unable to
suppress it.

I cannot bid you adieu; I shall never quit you more, and, from this
day, I shall not allow myself even the sight of a woman. But you have
not told me all! I have been odiously calumniated. You have given ear
to impostors. There is room for many blows in a heart like mine; you
cannot kill it easily. It is eternally yours, without division.

I tell you nothing of what is in my soul; I have neither strength
nor ideas. I suffer through you. So long as it is from your hand, why
should I complain? Ah! you shall see that I know how to love. Our
hearts will always understand each other.



PARIS, March 9, 1834.

My angel returns to me; ah! I will hide my anguish from you, my
griefs, my terrible resolutions of a week in which all things have
come together to rend my heart. You, Monday; Tuesday. I quarrelled,
perhaps to fight, with Émile de Girardin,--that was happiness. There's
a society I shall never see again and never want to see. My enemies
are setting about a rumour of my liaison with a Russian princess;
they name Madame P... I have seen since my return only Madame Appony,
Madame de C..., Madame de G..., and, for one hour, Madame de la B...
That rumour can come only from Geneva, and not from me, who have never
opened my mouth about my journey. Here I am, on bad terms with Madame
de C[astries] on account of the "Duchesse de Langeais"--so much the
better. But all this happens at once. So, no _solitude_ shall ever be
more complete than mine.

I have but an hour in which to answer you. Oh! my love, I swear to you
I wrote to Madame P... only to prevent the road to Russia being closed
to me. It would be poor cleverness to have it said here, in Paris, that
I am starting for Russia. That is the way to have passports refused to
me when I ask for them. I have not seen Zaluzki. Is it he who talks?
_Mon Dieu!_ I, in my hole, to be subjected to such griefs. Read the
"Duchesse de Langeais." You will read it with delight. As true as that
I love and adore you, I never said more than two sentences to Madame
Bossi, and I never looked at her.

You desire, oh, my angel, that I shall not again be coquettish except
with men. But between now and Vienna there is only toil and solitude.
Give me the means to send you my book, and your coffee, in which will
be your hair-chain. Therefore, undo the parcel yourself.

Never give yourself such anxieties again; yesterday, Saturday, without
_la dilecta_, I should have killed myself. Oh! I entreat you, if you
wish that I should esteem you and adore you to the end of our days,
do not change; be solely mine. I, do you see? have none but you. The
superhuman efforts that I make are the greatest proofs of love a man
can give. Oh, dear, adored one, my Eve, my Eva, to give his life, what
is that? Nothing. Each time that I saw you I gave it without regret. I
sacrificed all to you. But to rise every day at midnight to plunge into
a crater of work, and to do it with one name upon my lips, one image in
my heart, one woman before me!--_strength and constancy_; I live only
by the sentiment of grandeur which a mysterious love conveys to me.
This is loving. Oh! be my true Beatrice, a Beatrice who gives herself,
but remains an angel, a light! All that your jealousy can demand,
all that your caprice can exact shall be done with joy. Except the
_dilecta_, who corrects my proofs and who, I swear to you, is a mother,
no woman shall hear me, shall see me.

My mother and sister have decided. They will live together, and not
come to me. I am still free.

Oh, my love, my love, dear and adored, forgive me my answer to your
letter; but to sacrifice a love like mine to a child, to a husband,
to reject it for any interest whatever; that kills me. Oh, my angel,
to think that you are a fancy, after all that you said to me, after
all that you exacted, all that I accomplished,--it is enough to die
of it! I am proudly a poet; I live by the heart, by sentiments only,
and I have but one sentiment. My _dilecta_, at sixty years of age,
is no longer anything but a mother; she is all my family, as you are
all my heart, all my future! I have to work hard; the "Duchesse"
will appear on the 15th; she excites all Paris already. _Mon Dieu!_ a
thousand kisses; may each be worth a thousand. Oh, my angel, I hope I
may not again have to tell you that to betray me in the name of any one
whatever is to put me to death. I kiss you with transport. The Bengali
is virtuous. He is dead under his toil.

Put _Ave_ on the inkstand. The "Contes Drolatiques" will tell you why.

I have said nothing. I had a thousand effusions of the soul; I am
forced to keep them back. This letter must go to the post at one
o'clock. I received yours at midday.



PARIS, March 11, 1834.

My flower, my one sole love, I have just received the letter you
wrote me after having received the letter of _badnesses_. Oh! what
happiness to be able to write to you once more so that you can leave
Geneva without a regret! Since the letter in which you return to me,
you cannot imagine how beautiful, grand, sumptuous, has been the fête
in my heart at the recovery of your cherished heart. What joy, what
intoxication of thought, what forgetfulness of pain, or rather how
sweet its memory is, since it tells me how much you are loved, adored,
as you wish to be. Oh! if you had seen all that, never a suspicion, nor
a doubting word, nor a written phrase would dishonour the purity, the
blue immensity of this love that dyes all my soul, fills all my life,
is become the foundation of all my thoughts.

For the last two days I am drunk with happiness, glad, joyous, dancing,
when I have a moment, jumping like a child. Oh, dear talisman of
happiness, darling Eva, _minette_, wife, sister, family, light, all! I
live alone in delights; I have said a sincere farewell to the world, to
all. _Mon Dieu!_ forgive what you call my coquetries; I kneel at your
beloved knees, dimpled, loved, kissed, caressed; I lay my head against
you, I ask pardon, I will be solitary, a worker, I will walk with none
but Madame de B..., I will work without ceasing. Oh! blessed be the
Salève, if the Salève gives me my happy Eve! Ah! dearest, I adore you,
don't you see? I have no other life, no other future.

I received yesterday a letter from Madame P... I shall not answer it,
to end the correspondence. Besides, I can write only to you. My time is
taken up in a frightful manner. For the last ten days I have not varied
it; to bed at six o'clock, rising at midnight. I shall do this till
April 20. After which I shall take two weeks' liberty to rest. My book
will appear on the 16th, the day of your departure from Geneva. You
will find it addressed to you, _bureau restant_, at the coach office in
Genoa.

I wrote you in great haste on Sunday. Incredible tales are being told
about me. While I am sitting up all night they say an Englishwoman
has eloped with me. It is no longer a Russian princess; it is an
Englishwoman. Oh! my dear treasure, I implore you, never let your dear
celestial forehead be clouded by the effect of a "they say," for you
will hear it gravely said that I am crazy, and a thousand absurdities.
Write to me and expect an answer. I never keep you waiting. Your dear
writing overcomes me; it shines in my eyes like the sun. I _feel_ you,
I breathe you when I see it.

You will travel surrounded by the thoughts of love; I accompany you in
idea, I never leave you. At each correction made, at each page written,
I cry, "Vienna!" That is my word of joy, my exclamation of happiness.
Why do you speak of God? There are not two religions, and you are mine.
If you totter, I shall believe in nothing. Oh! my love, you have given
me _yourself_; you will never withdraw it. One alone cannot break that
which belongs to two. You are all nobleness, be all constancy. I shall
be that without effort, with joy; I love you like my breath, and _in
æternum_; oh, yes, for all my life.

I cannot tell you the sufferings of my week of passion, of my desire
to go and end my days at your house in Neufchâtel. I told Borget to
come at once. I withdrew "Séraphita" from the printers, and meant to
send you a sole copy (without the manuscript), bound with your gifts
of love. In short, a thousand follies, a thousand tempests agitated my
heart cruelly. Oh! I am much of a child! It is a crime to torment a
love so true, so pure, so unutterable! Oh! how angry I was with you! I
cursed your _analyzing_ forehead, on which I place a thousand kisses
of love. Oh! my good treasure, make me no more bitterness. In writing
a few sweet things to Madame P... I had in view to stand well with the
dear ambassadress, because, through her, I shall have Pozzo di Borgo,
and I do not want any hindrance to my year in the Ukraine, the first
complete happiness of my life. So, if your cousin shows you my letter
triumphantly, play the disdained, I entreat you. To see the Ukraine,
eighteen good months! and no money interests to hamper me! I can even
die for you without wronging any one. Listen, my love; this is the
secret of my nights: that I may be happy without a thought to tarnish
my joy! After that, I can die happy, if I have lived one year beside
you. Every hour would be the most beautiful poem of love. At every
hour I should be happy with the happiness of a child, a schoolboy, who
believes with delight in the love of a woman. If heaven marries us some
day, at whatever moment of my life it be, it will be the union of two
souls in one. You are a dear, loved spirit. You please me in all ways,
and you are, far-off or near, the superior woman, the mistress always
desired, each of us sustaining the other. It is so sweet to a man to
find that the mind, the heart, the soul, the understanding of the woman
who pours out to him his pleasures, is not narrow.

Oh! dearest, all is in you. I believe in you, I love you, and as I have
known you better I have found a thousand reasons for eternal attachment
in esteem and in the thousand things of your heart and mind. There is
no evil possible for me when I think of the life that you can make me
by your love. In writing this, which you will read in that room of
love before quitting it, I wish to cast upon this paper which you will
hold all my soul, all the tangible qualities of a being who is yours
forever; never withdraw from me the heart I have pressed, the adorable
charms of that cherished soul--yourself in short.

Adieu, soul of my soul, my faith, strength, courage, love--all the
great sentiments that make a great man, and a happy life. Adieu; _à
bientôt_, and sooner than you think, dearest.

Yes, I will love you better than any woman was ever loved, and our
"Chêne" will be better than that you picture to me. Coquette, indeed!
You know well that my heart will rest in yours without other clouds to
our love than those you make.

Come, Auguste, carry this to the general post-office.[1]

[Footnote 1: This is the last but one of these spurious letters. There
is one other which plainly belongs to this series, but it has been
placed at a later date for a purpose which will appear farther on.--TR.]



PARIS, March 30--April 3, 1834.

I have not written to you sooner, madame, because I presumed that you
would not be in Florence before the 1st of April. I have sent to the
address of MM. Borri & Co. a little package containing your copy of the
second part of the "Études de Mœurs au XIXe Siècle," and I have added
the Prologue of the third _dizain_ of the "Contes Drolatiques" for M.
Hanski, inasmuch as there is something in it about a famous inkstand,
and things that will make him laugh; for I do not insult you with my
Prologue, pay attention to that. It is to M. Hanski, and not to you,
that this proof belongs.

You will see at the end of the "Duchesse de Langeais" that I have
preserved a remembrance of the Pré-l'Évêque by dating the work from
that revolutionary and military spot where we saw such warlike
intentions. The third _dizain_ is also dated from the Eaux Vives, and
the Hôtel de l'Arc.

I have many things to tell you, but little time to myself. My
third Part is in the press, and I ought to make up for time lost.
Nevertheless, Madame Bêchet is a very good person.

Forgive the want of order in my letter, but I will tell you the events
that have happened to me as they come into my memory.

In the first place, I have said adieu to that mole-hill of Gay, Émile
de Girardin and Company. I seized the first opportunity, and it was so
favorable that I broke off, point-blank. A disagreeable affair came
near following; but my susceptibility as man of the pen was calmed by
a college friend, ex-captain in the ex-Royal Guard, who advised me. It
all ended with a piquant speech replying to a jest.

Another thing I must tell you is that I have recently quarrelled also
with the Fitz-James. And here I am, as much alone as the woman most
ambitious of love could desire, if any woman could wish for a man whom
excessive work is withering more and more. It is two months to-day that
I have been working eighteen hours a day.

The "Médecin de campagne" will be completely sold off in a few days.
I am in all the fuss and worries of getting out a new edition of that
book, which I want to sell at thirty sous, in order to popularize it.



Thursday, April 3.

From March 30, the day on which I began to write to you, until this
evening, I have been lying on my pallet unable to write, read, or work,
or do anything at all. A prostration of all my forces made me very
anxious; but to-day I am quite well, and I am going for a week to the
Pavilion in the forest of Fontainebleau. I have ordered all my letters
to be kept in Paris. I want change of air, and to work at one thing
only; for I have just suffered very much, but, thank God, it is all
over. I resume my letter.

I invited your cousin Bernard ... to dinner, with Zaluski, and
Mickiewicz, your dearest poet, whose face pleased me much. Bernard is
very handsome and was very witty.

I entreat you, madame, to send me word, by return of post, if you will
still be in Florence May 10th, how much time you stay in Rome, when you
arrive, and when you will leave; because when my third Part is done I
shall have twenty days to myself. I want to use them in travelling and
doing nothing, and I shall accompany Auguste Borget to Florence. We
shall leave May 1st and it takes only eight days from Paris to Florence.

Do not blame me too much for the unpunctuality of my correspondence.
In the extreme desire for LIBERTY which possesses me, I don't consult
human forces, I work exorbitantly. I have at this moment in press: two
volumes of my third Part of the "Études de Mœurs," two volumes of "Les
Chouans," and the third _dizain_; then, in a week from now, two volumes
for Gosselin. It is enough to terrify one. But there are two magic
words which make me able to do all: _liberty_ on the 1st of September;
_Vienna_ on that day; and I shall not regret my nights or my tortures,
for pen-receipts will tally with expenses.

_Mon Dieu!_ what a charming project,--to be in Florence May 10, and
back in Paris for the 20th! To see Florence with you! Write me quickly;
for after these terrible toils through the month of April I must have
twenty days' rest, and I know nothing more delightful than to see an
Italian city while accompanying a friend.

I think of you very often, and I much regret Geneva, where I worked
so much, all the while amusing myself. Except for a few worries, my
affairs are going well. Some flatterers say that my fame is increasing,
but I know nothing of that, for I live in my chimney-corner, working
for citizen rights in the Ukraine. Your poor "Séraphita" is laid aside.
What is promised must be done before all else. You yourself, without
knowing it, tell me to work. I keep before me the _bon à tirer_ [order
to print] which you gave for one sheet in Geneva, and it seems to me
a perpetual counsel. Do you know, it is rather melancholy to think
of you only with regrets. You do not know that for twelve or fifteen
years, Neufchâtel and Geneva are the two sole periods when I have been
permitted, by what grace of heaven I know not, to look neither forward
nor back; to live beneath the sky without thinking of griefs, or
business, or poverty; you have been to me something beneficent. There
is more gratitude in my remembrance than you know. And now that I have
been nailed to an insatiable table for two months, and shall be for
another month, leaving it only to sleep, I cannot think without emotion
of the walks to Sacconex, to Coppet, and of your house, and my hunger
which made us leave the garden where we were sitting under the willows
and you discovered that good smell in the Indian chestnut, macerated in
water. There are none of those tranquil pleasures in Paris. But I am
not in Paris now.

Here I am alone, much alone. I have parted from society, and have
returned to my former fruitful solitude. Before all things else, I must
finish a book, and the "Études de Mœurs" ought to be finished this
year. My liberty will be to go and come and remain where I please to go
and remain. Nevertheless, I do not know a more agreeable trip than to
Florence to see you for five days, and hear you for one single evening
say "tiyeuilles" or "Iodet." That, I think, would restore my courage
for another three months.

Perhaps I shall bring M. Hanski the third _dizain_ to laugh away his
"blue devils;" at any rate, he must be very ill if he resists my wild
joy. It is two months since I laughed; one more will make three; but
_then_ he shall die of laughing. Tell him that as Geneva was so base
in the matter of the poor Poles, I will never speak well of Geneva
again. Are you comfortable in Italy? How did you cross the mountains?
I follow you in thought. Have you thought of your poor, humble moujik
and his _blonde capricieuse_ at Aix? You ought to have thought of him
at Aiguebelles, where the servants at the inn are so gracious, and at
Turin, where he wished to go. Thank you, madame, if you think a little
of him who thinks much of you.

I have not seen Grosclaude. Our Exhibition is detestable. There are
five to ten fine pictures in three thousand five hundred canvases.

How is your dear Anna? You will tell me, won't you, how your little
caravan rolls on? M. Bernard ... came yesterday to make me compliments
on the "Duchesse de Langeais," and was very gracious.

_Mon Dieu!_ you will forgive me--me, a poor hermit toiler--for talking
to you so much of myself, because I am calling for your egotism in
reply; to talk to me solely of yourself would be doing well by me. I
can tell you only two things: I work constantly, I pay, I think of my
friends. I have in my heart a happy corner, and that ought to suffice
to make a noble life. My "blue devils" have no time to rise to the
surface.

Do you still intend to play Grandet at Wierzchownia? for in that case I
shall await thirty invitations before going there, to save provisions.
Do you want anything in Paris? I hope that you and M. Hanski will not
employ any other correspondent than me. But Borget and I will arrive
laden with cotignac, peach preserves, and Angoulême and Strasburg
pâtés. You ought to give me a commission; you don't know what pleasure
it is to me to busy myself for something a friend asks of me, how
it brightens my life. A fancy--that's myself only; but the fancy of
another, whom I love, is a double fancy.

Spachmann [binder] has done your album, and I am beginning to collect
the autographs. It will take long, but you shall have it, with
patience. I begin with the oldest. Pigault-Lebrun is eighty-five years
old; he shall begin it.

Adieu, madame, I would like to keep on writing to you always, just
as when I was by your fireside I did not want to go away. But I must
bid you adieu--no, not adieu, but au revoir. I shall await with great
impatience your answer, to know if you will be in Florence May 10. Do
be there! The shorter the journey, the longer time I shall have to see
you; I have twenty days to myself, no more. The twenty-first I must
resume the _yoke of misery_.

Madame de G[irardin] has made many efforts to get me back again,
but your obstinate moujik--he would not be moujik if he did not say
"nie"--has said nay as elegantly as he could, for he is a little
civilized, your devoted moujik.[1]

HONORÉ DE BALZAC.

You know that all I wish to say to those about you; my regards, my
respects, will have more value by passing through your lips.

[Footnote 1: Delphine de Girardin made many attempts to recover him,
and did so, finally. In spite of his estrangement from her house she
was always loyal to him; and during the time of his quarrel with her
husband she wrote many kind things of him in "La Presse."--TR.]



FRAPESLE, near ISSOUDUN, April 10, 1834.

MADAME,--Since I had the pleasure of writing to you I have been very
ill. My night work, my excesses, have been paid for. I fell into a
state of prostration which did not allow me to read or write or even
to listen to a sustained discussion. My bodily weakness equalled
the intellectual weakness. I could not move. What has frightened me
most is that for the last two years these attacks of debility have
increased. At first, after a month of toil, I would feel one or two
hours' weakness; then five hours, then a whole day. Since then the
weakness has become excessive, lasting two days, three days. This time
it came near death; but for the last ten days I am convalescent.[1] The
doctor ordered me change of air, absolute repose, no occupation, and
nourishing food. So I am here for ten days in Berry, at Issoudun, with
Madame Carraud.

To-day, April 10th, I am better; I can write to you and tell you of my
little death-struggle, my despair, for, feeling no force, no thought
within me, I wept like a child. But to-day I recover courage; _passato,
pericolo, gabbato il santo_. I shall laugh at the doctor who said to
me:--

"You will die like Bichat, like Béclard, like all those who abuse by
their brain the human forces; and what is so extraordinary in this
is that you--you the most energetic _forbidder_ of emotion, you the
apostle who preach the absence of thought, you who pretend that life
goes off in the passions and by the action of the brain more than by
bodily motions,--you will be dead for having neglected the formulas you
formulated!"

From all this has resulted, madame, a good and beautiful project of
opposing to each month of toil a full month of amusement. So, from the
10th or 12th of May, I shall take twenty days in which to go and see
you for two or three days wherever you are in Italy. If you are willing
to see Saint Peter's at Rome in June, we will see Rome together. Then,
after admiring Rome for five days, I will come back and take up my
yoke. Next, having spent July and August on new _pensums_, I will go
to see Germany, and salute you once more in Vienna, for I don't know
anything sweeter than to give a purpose of friendship to a journey of
pure amusement, to go in search of two or three gentle evenings, and
make you laugh, and chase away the "blue devils."

You have not written to me; do you know that there is ingratitude in
you? it is you who have a "French" heart. What! not the smallest little
line! Nothing from Genoa, nothing from Florence. You received, I hope,
in Florence, my third Part, and the third _dizain_ to make M. Hanski
laugh.

Just now I am completing the third Part, and doing a
master-work,--"César Birotteau,"--the brother of him whom you know,
victim like his brother, but victim of Parisian civilization, whereas
his brother is the victim of a single man. It is another "Médecin de
campagne," but in Paris; it is Socrates _stupid_, drinking, in shadow
and drop by drop, his hemlock; an angel trodden underfoot, an honest
man misjudged. Ah! it is a great picture; it will be grander, more vast
than anything I have yet done. I want, if you forget me, that my name
should be cast to you by Fame, as a reproach.

Do you know, madame, that you are very seriously in my prayers of night
and morning,--you and all those you care for? You do not truly know
the heart which chance has made you meet. A desire to boast possesses
me--but no; time will be to you a too constant, too noble eulogy on me.
I do not wish to add to it.

As soon as "Birotteau" is printed, the third Part out, the _dizain_ in
the light, I shall rush joyously to Italy to seek your approbation as a
sweet reward. Maître Borget cannot come with me; you will see him, no
doubt, in Venice; but the artist moves slowly, he sips all, whereas I
am forced to go like the wind and return like a vapour. Borget is here,
and returns with me to Paris, April 20.

Poor Madame Carraud is very unwell, and is causing alarm to her
friends. She confided to me the secret of her sufferings. She is
perhaps pregnant, and another child would be her death. She has hardly
strength to live.

I beg of you, write me in detail about your travelling life, that I
may know all your joys and even your disappointments. I have so much
admired the splendid face of Mickiewicz; what a noble head! Write me
what you think of the "Duchesse de Langeais." Kiss Anna on the forehead
for me, her poor _horse_. Present my regards to M. Hanski; how does
Italy suit him? My respects to Mademoiselle Séverine. To you, madame,
my most affectionate thoughts.

I must bid you adieu for to-day, because work calls me. In ten days,
after "Birotteau" is done, I will write you a long letter and make up
arrears. I will tell you my past troubles, my sufferings laid to rest,
and my sensations, inasmuch as you deign to take an interest in your
poor literary moujik. Your beautiful Séraphita is very mournful; she
has folded her wings and awaits the hour to be yours. I will not have
a single rival thought disturb that thought you have adopted. Perhaps
I will bring her to Rome that she may be done, little by little, under
your eyes. Each day enlarges the picture and _magnifies it_.

I have not had time to answer Madame Jeroslas ...; she cannot be
pleased with me; truly it is not possible for me to write except to you
and the persons who are nearest to my heart. One has but three friends
in the world, and if one is not exclusive for them, what good is it to
love? When I have an instant to myself I am too tired to write; but
I think; I carry my thoughts back to Geneva, I utter, mechanically,
"tiyeuilles," and I illusion myself. Then a proof arrives, and I return
to my sad condition of workman, of manual labour.

Well, adieu. Be happy; see the beautiful scenery, the fine pictures,
the masterpieces, the galleries, and say to yourself if some gnat hums,
or the fire sparkles, or a flame darts up, it is a friend's thought
coming from my heart, from my soul toward you; and that I, too,--I
would like my share in those beautiful enjoyments of art, but that I am
here in my galley, having nought to offer you except a thought--but a
constant thought.

I wrote you on the day I felt recovered; therefore have no fear if you
take an interest in my health. I have no more weakness except in the
eyes.

[Footnote 1: This letter in the French volume is dated April 10, which
is, of course, wrong, or else the previous letter is misdated.--TR.]



PARIS, April 28, 1834.

MADAME,--I have just received your good letter of the 20th, written in
Florence; and you know by this time that it is impossible for me to go
there. You must have received my little line from Issoudun, in which I
asked you with great cries for Saint Peter's in Rome. For that trip I
can answer. At that time all my affairs will be arranged. But Madame
Bêchet needs me and my Parts, otherwise she will be compromised.

I hope you have not mingled anything personal in your reflections on:
"it was only a poem" [conclusion of the "Duchesse de Langeais"]. You
feel, of course, that a _Thirteener_ must have been a man of iron. You
would not accuse an author of thinking all he writes?

If painters, poets, artists were sharers in all they represent, they
would die at twenty-five. No, my duchess is not my Fornarina. When
I have her--but _I have_ a Fornarina--I shall never paint her. Her
adorable spirit may animate my soul, her heart may be in my heart, her
life in my life, but paint her, show her to the public!--I would sooner
die of hunger, for I should die of shame.

I am very glad that you do not yet know me fully; because now you may,
perhaps, love me better some day. _Mon Dieu!_ what you tell me of your
health and that of Monsieur Hanski made me bound in my chair. Madame,
in the name of the sentiment, the sincere affection I bear you, I
implore you when you or Monsieur Hanski or your Anna are ill, write
to me. Don't laugh at what I am going to say to you. Recent facts at
Issoudun proved to me that I possess a great magnetic power, and that
either by a somnambulist, or by myself, I can cure those who are dear
to me. Therefore, have recourse to me. I will leave everything to go to
you. I will devote myself with the pious warmth of true devotion to the
care that illness needs, and I can give you undeniable proofs of that
singular power. Therefore, put me in the way of knowing how you are.
Don't deceive me, and don't laugh at this.

Your _romances_ afflict me. Why have such dark suppositions? _Mon
Dieu!_ as for me, when I dream, I dream of happiness only.

Yesterday, some one told me the secret of my journeys was discovered,
and that I had been to join Queen Hortense. I laughed much at that.

You make me weep with rage when I read what you say of Florence. Shall
I ever meet with all that again? Oh! make me very supplicating to M.
Hanski for the eight days I can be in Rome. See! it is possible. Saint
Peter's day is the 23rd of June. I can leave Paris on the 12th for
Lyon, and reach Marseille the l5th, whence a steamboat takes you in
forty-eight hours to Civita Vecchia. I could stay eight or ten days
in Rome without doing any harm to my affairs; for all, doctors and
somnambulists, are unanimous in beseeching me to balance a month's work
by a month's amusement. Now there is nothing that takes me so out of
my work as music and travel--in Paris no interest excites my soul; I
live in a desert; I am, as it were, in a convent; the heart is moved
by nothing. Rome would be a grand and beautiful distraction if I were
there alone, but with you for _cicerone_ what would it be! And this is
not said from gallantry, _à la_ "charming Frenchman." No, it is said
from heart to heart, to the woman of the North, to the barbarian!

I have broken with everybody; I was tired of grimaces. I have but two
unalterable friendships here which are true, and to which I at times
confide. Then, I have work into which I fling myself daily.

This letter will still reach you in Florence. It will tell you feebly
my regrets, which are boundless. This heavy material life, which I so
largely escaped in Geneva, oppresses me here. I thirst for my liberty,
for freedom, and if you knew what prodigies of will, what creating
persistence is needed to secure no more than my twenty-four days in
June and July, you would say, like one of my friends who has perceived
a little of the intellectual working of my furnace (and you know more
than a mere acquaintance), that Napoleon never showed as much will, or
as much courage.

What you have written me about Montriveau [in the "Duchesse de
Langeais"] worries me, for you are _a little_ epigrammatic, and it
would be a great grief to me to be ill judged or misunderstood by you.
You are the second person to whom I have shown my mind in its truth. I
like to let no one penetrate it, because if they do, what is there to
give to those we love? You did not mean to wound me, did you?

I like your judgments on Florence and works of art much; and I would
greatly like, if you will be so good to your moujik, that you should
study Rome, so that when I come I may not stop to look at bagatelles,
but see in my eight days all that there is of really fine, and good,
and masterly, which goes to the soul. Do not say "Montriveau" to me
again. Remember that I have the life of the heart and the life of the
brain; that I live more by sentiments than by the caprices of the mind;
that I would rather feel than express ideas; and that neither way does
wrong to the other. One needs a little intellect to love.

I write you as it comes, without premeditation; for I must tell you
that I am in the midst of "Les Chouans," which I am printing with
extreme rapidity, _causa metalli_, to put an end to some debts. But
no matter! my scribbling will surely tell you that a loving thought
follows you wherever you go, and that there is at a fireside near the
Observatoire a poet who takes interest in your steps, is troubled by
your cough, and made uneasy by Monsieur Hanski's illness. I was already
uneasy enough at receiving no letters from you. I belong to you like a
moujik, and if M. Hanski gives wheat to his, you owe to me, moujik of
Paulowska, a few straws of affection, here and there. You might have
written to me _three times_ since Turin.

I will tell you nothing of my combats; I am occupied solely by my work
and by a life which is also a work for me; not a poem, madame, but all
that there is of good and beautiful upon this earth. Thus, everything
here, politics, men, and things, seem to me very paltry beside what I
feel in heart and brain.

I am every day more grieved to have been forced to abandon "Séraphita;"
but in Rome it shall be the work of my choice. It belongs to you and
it ought to be done beneath your eyes.

_Mon Dieu!_ if you are better, tell me so quickly. Throw into the post
these words only: "I am," or "We are better." It is so good to see
the writing, the painting, of a thought escaped from the heart of a
friend! You don't know how, in the evening, when I am very weary, my
castle in the air, my novel, my own, is Diodati; but a Diodati without
the deceptions of your novels; a Diodati without bitterness in its
dénouement. Of us two, am I indeed the younger and the one most full
of illusions? There are days when I say _tiyeuilles_, laughing like a
child, and those who take me for a grave man would be stupefied. Come,
don't knock down my dreams, my castles. Let me believe in a cloudless
sky. Since I exist I have lived by unalterable beliefs only, and you
are one of those beliefs. Don't cough and look dark; may the troubles
of _spleen_ never come either to you or to M. Hanski, to whom my letter
is half addressed; take it only as a talk full of affection.

Our Exhibition has nothing regrettable. M. Hanski would not have bought
much there; but if I were rich I should like to send you one picture,
an Algiers interior, which seems to me excellent. Borget is preparing
for his journey; you will see him in Venice perhaps, for he moves
slowly.

I beg of you, madame, tell me whether, according to this new
arrangement, we can meet in Rome; for I begin to perceive that I am
writing to you to know that. You would be very good if you would
torment M. Hanski in order to obtain it. In the first place, if you
torment him you will amuse him; you will substitute for his blue devils
real annoyances; next, you will create a little conjugal drama, in
which you will be victorious; and it is so good to triumph, especially
over a husband.

Well, once more adieu. To all those who are near you give the
remembrances of a poor workman in letters, who subscribes himself your
affectionate, your wholly devoted servant and friend,

HONORÉ DE BALZAC.

I am reading over your letter to see if I have forgotten anything. No;
I have answered all, and only omitted to tell you one thing, because
it is too daily: it is that I press, across space, the pretty hand you
hold out to me so graciously, and wish a thousand pleasures to your
caravan.

_À bientôt_ in Rome; for work, alas! will make me consume the time with
terrifying rapidity. Adieu, I cannot quit my pen any better than I
could quit your house in Geneva.

You chose to laugh, _à la_ Française, at my "beautiful marquise, whose
fine eyes make me die of love." I will play the Frenchman and tell you
to turn that speech round, except as to the beauty of the eyes. Fie!
it is not nice to be always showing me the rock on which my vanity was
wrecked. Come, admit that you have not been frank, or it will be the
ground of a quarrel in Rome--if one could quarrel with you on meeting
again.



PARIS, May 10, 1834.

I have this moment received, madame, your letter of April 30. Alas! I
have buried my hopes of the Rome trip. It always costs me horribly to
renounce an illusion; all my illusions seem to be one and inseparable.

I have but a moment to answer you, for in order that you may get this
letter before you leave Florence, on the 20th, it must be posted
to-day, and it is now twelve o'clock. You do not tell me where you are
going. Is it to Milan? What will be your address? How long shall you
stay? I could see you there if I went with Borget. But at any rate, in
September, at Vienna. That is more reasonable.

_Mon Dieu!_ yes, the advice you give is impossible to follow. With the
certainty of risk, I risk myself. There are no thanks worthy of the
kindness you show in speaking to me so frankly of what I do; and you
will not know, except in course of years, how grateful I am for this
frankness. Do not be afraid; go on, blaming boldly.

You tell me to go to Gérard's; have I the time? Time melts in my
fingers. To bring to an end my crushing liabilities I have undertaken
a tragedy, in prose, called, "Don Philippe et Don Carlos." It is the
old subject of Don Carlos already treated by Schiller. All must march
abreast; the little literature of copper coins, the puerilities, the
studies of manners and morals, and the great thoughts that are not
understood,--"Louis Lambert," "Séraphita," "César Birotteau," etc.

My life is always the same. I rise to work, I sleep little. Sometimes
I let myself go to gentle reveries. Since I last wrote to you, I have
had but one recreation; I heard Beethoven's symphony in C minor at
the Conservatoire. Ah! how I regretted you. I was alone in a stall--I
alone! It was suffering without expression. There exists in me a need
of expansion which toil beguiles, but which the first emotion brings to
the surface like a gush of tears. Yes, I am alone, deplorably alone. To
find happiness I need the evening hour, silence, not work, but solitude
and my inmost thoughts.

Write me quickly where I shall send you "Les Chouans," which will
appear on the 15th, five days hence. Florence will certainly see me;
you have been happy there. I shall go and pick up your thoughts in
seeing those beautiful places, those noble works. I am only jealous of
the illustrious dead: Beethoven, Michel Angelo, Raffaelle, Poussin,
Milton,--all that was ever grand, noble, and solitary stirs me.

All is not said about me yet; I am only at the little details of a
great work. When a man has undertaken what I have to do,--ah! madame,
permit me to confide this to your heart,--it is impossible to fall into
the petty and base intrigues of this world; sentiments ought to be as
great as the works desire to be great. My ambition is even stronger on
the side of sentiments than it is for a fame which, after all, shines
only upon graves! So, I live alone, more alone than ever; nothing
drags me from my contemplations: to love and to think, to act and to
meditate. To develop all one's strength on two great things,--work and
the richest emotions of the soul,--what can one ask more than that? A
drop of friendship, a little sunshine; to press a hand by which we can
support ourselves.

Your advice upon my writings proves to me that on one point you have
crowned my ambition. I would that I could send into your soul by this
paper the emotions of pleasure your letter has caused me. But that is
difficult.

So I cannot see you again until Vienna! Till then I shall not listen
again to the only person who has made me hear a language completely
poetical and largely generous. I must stop, for you will take truth
for flattery. What a hindrance is writing; how often one look has more
meaning than all words. Well, you will divine whatever I think that is
good, and all that time prevents me from saying. You wall tell yourself
that it is impossible for a solitary man--a man often crushed by work
and lost in Paris--not to think, every day, of persons who love him
truly; you will know that I am occupied with you, and am gathering for
you those autographs.

_Mon Dieu!_ what a number of things to tell you! How the Academy wanted
to give the Montyon prize to the "Médecin de campagne," and what I
did to avoid being put in the competition,--as many applications and
proceedings were needed as the other competitors made to obtain the
prize. And about my tragedy, and my other works in hand! But it is very
difficult not to forget one's self in thinking of you.

If you go to Milan, if you stay some time, if I can go and say
_bonjour_ to you for a few days, tell me; for from the 20th to the 30th
of June I should be very glad of an object for a trip, and I know none
that would give me such keen happiness. I will inquire about Bartolini;
but I see plainly you do not know our sculptors. In the Exhibition
there was a statue of Modesty which might crush the antique; in
sculpture we have great talents that are real. You like Bartolini, so I
will like him, and I will make Gérard like him. But you think no longer
of Grosclaude; do you know that your admirations have something which
might alarm any other heart than a sincerely friendly one?

You have shown such exquisite feeling for my poor "Chouans" that, to
make it less unworthy of you and me, I have delivered myself up to
patient toil such as my printer alone has an idea of. You will re-read
the book in Milan, no doubt. The third Part of the "Études de Mœurs"
will not be ready before the first days of June. I should much like to
have Susette take them to you from the author, who would then solicit
an audience and recover from the fatigues of the journey through the
hope of seeing you.

Alas! I have such business on hand that the devil and his horns could
not get away. But I am a three-horned demon, of the race, rather
degenerated, of Napoleon.

A thousand gracious thoughts and memories. Find here all that you can
wish in a heart full of gratitude and devotion.

What! will you really be in Vienna in July? So soon! These distances
placed between us seem to me like farewells. But I shall go to Germany
in September. I shall arrive rich with some successes; which please
me now only because you take an interest in them; you make them more
essential to me for this reason.

Well, here is the hour. I do not know where to write to you, but I
shall write all the same, and when your new box comes I will send it to
you. There is no lake at Vienna, therefore give me the hope of seeing
the Lago Maggiore with you. At Vienna I shall do my reconnoitring on
the Danube, in order to paint the battle of Wagram, and the fight
at Essling, which are to be my work during the coming winter in the
Ukraine, if you will have me. But I must also see the countries through
which Prince Eugène marched from Italy across the Tyrol.

Adieu, adieu, you whom one does not like to leave. You know as well as
I all that I think, and you must be kind enough to give expression to
my sentiments to your travelling companions. Oh! how I wish I could
have seen with you the city of flowers!



PARIS, June 3rd--June 21, 1834.

I have this moment received, madame, the last letter you did me the
honour to write to me from Florence; I hope, therefore, that this one
will find you in Milan in time to prevent false hopes, as you are so
kind as to interest yourself in my excellent Borget. He is still at
Issoudun, and will take Italy by way of the Tyrol, beginning by both
banks of the Rhine; therefore he will have no chance of meeting you. I
am sorry. His is one of those fine souls one needs to know in order to
judge of man and have some ideas of the future.

I myself renounce with sorrow the pleasure I had planned, of bidding
you good-day in Milan. You put such grace and urgency into your
inquiries as to my situation that I cannot help speaking of it to
you after summing it up for myself. I still owe six thousand ducats
[sixty to eighty thousand francs]; this will be comprehensible to you
if turned into your currency. Between now and the last of October, I
must pay off two thousand. The remaining four thousand are owing to my
mother. But until the end of October I have five hundred ducats to pay
monthly; and since my return from Geneva my pen and my courage have
sufficed until now to pay that sum. If by the end of September I am
free, I shall have done marvels. But until then neither truce nor rest.
My tranquil, joyous winter must be won at this cost. The doctor thinks
well of the Baden waters. This is my situation.

For the last two months I have worked night and day at the work
you honour with your preference. You have had much influence on my
determination relating to that work ["Les Chouans"]. In the desire to
make it worthy of your friendship I have re-made it. It is not yet
perfect, because, absorbed in the faults of the _ensemble_, I have let
pass faults of detail and several mistakes. But, such as it is, it
may now bear my name and you can avow your charitable protection. It
has needed a courage no one will give me credit for; but the secret
of my perseverance and my love for this work has been in my desire to
be agreeable to you, and to deserve one of those approbations which
intoxicate me with pleasure, and to hear from your lips, when I have
shaken off the enormous weight of my troubles, that the work pleases
you. I shall send it to Florence to M. Borri, requesting him to forward
it to you in Milan; and I shall also send it to Trieste, so that this
poor first flower may be certain to receive your friendly glances. I
have been delighted with it, and I have let myself be persuaded that
you are right in liking it. I have tried to justify your preference.
Marie de Verneuil is much finer, and the work has been well cleaned up;
but, as the printer said to me: "It is not forbidden to put butter on
spinach,"--a saying worthy of Charlet.

Great news! Pichot is dismissed from the "Revue de Paris;" I return
there with several pecuniary advantages, which will help me to get
free. "Séraphita" serves me to re-enter with great éclat. The work has
surprised Parisians. When the last number appears I shall add a letter
of _envoi_ to you, in which you will find the dedication, which I shall
try to make worthy of you, simple and grand. It was not put in the
beginning because I did not wish to dedicate to you a book not finished.

Here is a whole long month that I have worked to pure loss on my third
Part. I am dissatisfied, vexed with what I do. Nevertheless, you will
find it at Trieste. I must make a composition in the style of "Eugénie
Grandet," to sustain this Part [of the Études de Mœurs].

My affairs are, at this moment, complicated by a transaction I have
proposed to M. Gosselin, to annul our contracts, which will require
six thousand francs in cash paid to him, for which he will return my
agreements. That point obtained, I shall have no engagements except
with Madame Bêchet; and by three months of great labour I could, by
the end of September, take the road to Germany, poor, but without
anxieties, carrying my tragedy to do, and idleness to enjoy near you.
If you knew what cares, debates, labours were necessary to reach this
result! But what happiness to recover liberty, what pleasure to do what
one likes!

Spachmann is no longer Coquebin. By my efforts, and those of my sister,
he has just married a young and pretty girl who will have some fortune.
She brings him five hundred ducats, which make him rich, and she has
four thousand more in expectation. Mademoiselle Borel was quite wrong;
here's a happy man made. I thought of you in marrying this poor binder,
about whom we laughed and talked at your fireside in Geneva.

The greatest sorrows have overwhelmed Madame de Berny. She is far from
me, at Nemours, where she is dying of her troubles. I cannot write you
about them; they are things that can only be spoken of ear to ear. But
I am all the more alone, deplorably alone,--as much alone, that is, as
I can be, for treasures are in my thought during the hours of repose
and calmness which I take with delight. All is hope for me, because all
is belief.

If you knew how much there is of you in each rewritten phrase of
the "Chouans"! You will only know it when I can tell you in the
chimney-corner at Vienna, in some hour of calm and silence when the
heart has neither secrets nor veils.

The correction of the second edition of "Le Médecin de campagne"
draws to a close, and I am half-way on with the third _dizain_,--so
that I now am driving abreast nine volumes. My life is sober, silent,
self-contained. Nevertheless, a _lady_ has crossed the straits and
written me a beautiful letter _in English_, to which I have answered
that I only understand French, and that I respect ladies too much to
give it out for translation. The affair stopped there. I received
a letter from Madame Jeroslas ..., delightful in style and quite
surprising. I have not yet replied.

Those are all the events of my life since I wrote you last.

"Philippe le Réservé" is put aside. Nevertheless, the literary world
is very curious about my play. In reply to what you deign to write
me about it, I must tell you that Carlos was so deeply in love with
the Queen that there is sufficient proof that the child of which she
died pregnant ("treated for dropsy, for God took pity on the throne
of Spain, and blinded the doctors," says the sensitive Mariano) was
the Infant's. So in my play the Queen is guilty, according to received
ideas. Carlos idem; Philippe II. and Carlos are fooled by Don John
of Austria. I conform to history and follow it step by step. However,
according to all appearance, this work will be done under your eye, for
it is the only thing that can be done while travelling, and you shall
then judge of the political depths of that awful tragedy. It needs a
lead well guarded by ropes to gauge it! Two of my friends are ardently
rummaging historical manuscripts that I may miss nothing. I want to
obtain even the plans of the palace and the rules of etiquette of the
Spanish court under Philippe II.

MM. Berryer and Fitz-James wish to have me nominated for deputy, but
they will fail. The matter will be decided within a month, and you
will know it, no doubt, at Trieste. If I were nominated I should have
myself ordered to Baths, for the portfolio of prime minister would not
induce me to renounce the dear use I mean to make of the first moment
of liberty I have ever won in my life.

The farther I go on, the higher is the ideal I form of true happiness.
For me, a happy day is more than worlds. When I want to give myself
a magnificent fête I shut my eyes and lie down on a sofa, and absorb
myself in remembering the silly things I said to you with my _pa'ole
d'ôneû panachée_,[1] beside the Lake of Geneva, and I go over again
that good day at Diodati, which effaced a thousand pangs I had felt
there a year before. You have made me know the difference between a
true affection and a simulated affection, and for a heart as childlike
as mine there is cause there for eternal gratitude.

Yesterday I went to see my mother and found her much changed, very
ill and quite resigned. I have been sad ever since. In settling and
clearing up our accounts a fortnight ago she fretted greatly about what
would happen to me if she died, and that constant foresight pained me.
Yesterday I was far more sad. She is very good to me. She has sent for
me, but to-day I cannot go because I am expecting an arbitrator to whom
I must explain the Gosselin affair. But to-morrow I shall go quickly. I
have now only fifteen days in which to do a volume which is impatiently
demanded, and never did I have less warmth of imagination.

[Footnote 1: Fashionable speech of the "Incroyables."--TR.]


June 20.

You are at Milan. I am not there! This letter, begun seventeen days
ago, has remained unfinished by force of circumstances. In the first
place, the return of my brother from the West Indies with a wife (was
it necessary to go five thousand miles to find a wife like that?); then
annoyances, vexations without number, besides work. The publisher of
"Les Chouans" has not paid me. Here I am, with notes falling due. Then,
M. Gosselin demands ten thousand francs, nearly a thousand ducats,
to break our contract; I am trying to find them. But the greatest
misfortune is this: after much trouble I had succeeded in finding a
subject for my third Part; but after doing _half a volume_ I flung
it into the box of embryos, and have begun anew with a grand, noble,
magnificent subject, which will give you, I hope, both honour and
pleasure. According to my ideas, and according to my critics, it is
above everything else. But I have had to make up for time lost. Ah!
madame, what hours of despair and terrible insomnia between the 3rd and
the 20th of June. There must have been sympathy!

Believe in me, I entreat you. Whether you go to Vienna or to
Wierzchownia, my winter is destined to you. I want to flee Paris; I
want absolutely to dig out in silence my Philippe II. You will see me
arrive with the rapidity, the fidelity of a swallow.

I shall go, in July, to Nemours to write, away from Paris, which is
intolerable in summer, my fourth and fifth Parts of the "Études de
Mœurs." If I can end them in September I shall make untold efforts to
get the last printed by the beginning of November. Perhaps you will
still be in Vienna the first fifteen days of that month. I would like
to know your itinerary, for I shall take, as soon as I can, fifteen
days' liberty, and shall go, naturally, to the country you are in.

I send to-day, to Trieste, the "Chouans" for you, and the second
edition of the "Médecin de campagne" for Monsieur Hanski, as you have
yours. I will send my third Part later, for I am very impatient to have
your opinion about this new production. When "Séraphita" is finished
I will bring her to you, bound by the husband of the pretty girl of
Versailles. You will see he had not the heart to continue Coquebin to
do that savage binding of cloth and satin. But if I could know how long
you stay at Trieste, I could leave here July 10th and be at Trieste the
16th, see you for three days, and get back again. I have a thousand
things to bring you; the _cotignac_, the perfumes, and _tutti quanti_.

I shall end this letter by saying: _à bientôt_. The hope of crossing
many countries to find you at the end of the journey gives me courage.
I work, now, twenty consecutive hours. Well, I must bid you adieu,
saying, as gracefully as I can, that you are less a memory to me than
a heart-thought, and that you would be very unkind to fling in my face
forever that I am a Frenchman. Remember, madame, that I am a Coquebin
who does not marry, or at least only marries with the Muses. I have
been alarmed by reading in Hoffmann (article on Vows) a severe judgment
on Polish women; still, I had, to tell the truth, a pleasurable
evening in thinking that the article was true for you in all that was
flattering, and false in all that was cruel.

Our poor Sismondi has been roughly demolished (the word is true) in the
"Revue de Paris" of last Sunday. His "Histoire des Français" has been
rased, destroyed--from garret to cellar.

Poor Madame de Castries is going away, dying, and so dying that I
blame myself for not having been there for a month, for those infamous
Parisians have deserted her because she suffers. What a sad sentiment
is that of pity. Therefore!--Ah!


Friday, 21.

I have been for several days sad and distressed. I did not tell you
this yesterday. The post hour went by, and I kept this letter. Yes, I
have failed in hope, I who live only by hope, that noble virtue of the
Christian life. "Le Médecin de campagne" reappears to-morrow. What will
be its fate?

I have been very happy this morning; you could never, perhaps, guess
why. I should have to paint to you the state of a poor solitary who
stays in his cell, rue Cassini, and whose only rejoicing is in a tiny
winged insect which comes from time to time. The poor little gleam was
late in coming, and I was horribly afraid, saying to myself: "Where
is she? Is anything amiss with her? She has been eaten up!" At last
the pretty little creature came. Once more I saw my _bête à bon dieu_,
iridescent, a little mournful; but I put it on my paper and asked it,
as if it were a person: "Have you come from Italy? How are my friends?"

You will take me for a lunatic--no, for I have heart and intellect, and
only trespass through excess, not want, of sensibility. That is how a
man who wrote the "Treize" can weep with joy on again beholding the
scales of his little insect.

Well, adieu. I wish that _you_ might have the same quiverings. That
is only saying that one is still young, that the heart beats strong,
that life is beautiful, that one feels, one loves, and that all the
riches of the earth are less than one hour of sensuous joy such as I
had with my little insect. And, also, do you know how much of joy,
amber, flowers, grace of the countries it flies through, that little
creature can bring back? See all that poesy can invent about a _bête à
bon dieu_, and what lunatics are hermits and dreamers!

Well, adieu; be happy on your journey; see all those fine countries
well. As for me, I am furious at being nailed to this little mahogany
table, which has been so long the witness of my thoughts, sorrows,
miseries, distresses, joys--of all! Thus I will never give it except
to ----. But I will not tell you all my secrets to-day.

To-day I am gay. I have been so sad nearly all this month! There are my
beautiful blue flowers in the barren fields between the Observatoire
and my window drooping their heads. It is hot. Nevertheless, if I want
to see you this winter I must mind neither weariness, nor heat, nor
weakness.

Would you believe that the second edition of the "Physiologie du
Mariage" does not appear, that those men will not pay me, and that I
shall have another lawsuit on my hands? _Mon Dieu!_ What have I done to
those fellows!

Kiss Anna on the forehead. Oh! how I wish I were her horse again.
Offer my regards to M. Hanski. Put all that is most flowery in French
courtesy at the feet of your two companions, and keep for yourself,
madame, whatever you will of my heart.



PARIS, July 1, 1834.

Ah! madame, nature is avenging herself for my disdain of her laws; in
spite of my too monastic life my hair is falling out by handfuls, it is
whitening to the eye! the absolute inaction of my body is making me fat
beyond measure. Sometimes I remain twenty-five hours seated. No, you
won't recognize me any more! The moments of despair and melancholy are
more frequent. Griefs of all sorts are not lacking to me.

I wrote three half-volumes before finding anything suitable for the
third Part of the "Études de Mœurs." It will at last appear on the
20th of this month. (Be satisfied, it is not I who am elected deputy.)

You will tell me, will you not? where I am to send my third Part. Do
not deprive me of the happiness of being read by you, which is one of
my rewards. I still have three months' arduous labour before me; shall
I finish before October? I don't know. I am like the bird flying above
the face of the waters and finding no rock on which to rest its feet. I
should be unjust if I did not say that the flowery island where I could
repose is in sight of my piercing eyes; but it is far, far-off.

I should like to write to you only good news; but, although arranged,
my compromise with M. Gosselin is not yet signed. I must find a
thousand ducats, and in our book business nothing is so scarce; for
_books_ are not _francs_--and not always _français_!

I laugh, but I am profoundly sad. "La Recherche de l'Absolu" will
certainly extend the limits of my reputation; but these are victories
that cost too dear. One more, and I shall be seriously ill. "Séraphita"
has cost me many hairs. I must find exaltations that do not come at the
cost of life. But that work which belongs to you ought to be my finest.

Tell me to what Baths you are going, for it is possible
if--if--if--that I may myself bring you various little things, such as
a faultless new edition of the "Médecin de campagne," my third Part,
and the manuscript of "Séraphita," which will be finished in August.
Yes, stay at some place where I can go till September l5th.

If I compromise with Gosselin, I can free myself only by alienating
an edition of the "Études Philosophiques." That will be work added to
work. In the total solitude in which I live, sighing after a poesy
which is lacking to me and which you know, I plunge into music. I have
taken a seat in a box at the Opera, where I go for two hours every
other day. Music to me is memories. To hear music is to love those we
love, better. It is thinking with joys of the senses of our inward
joys; it is living beneath eyes whose fire we love; it is listening to
the beloved voice. So Monday, Wednesday, and Friday, from half-past
seven to ten o'clock, I love with delight. My thought travels.

Well, I must say _<au revoir_; as soon as my compromise is made I will
write to you about it in detail. Never find fault with my devoted
friendship; it is independent of time and space. I think of you nearly
all day, and is not that natural? The only happy moments I have known
for a year, moments when there was neither work nor the worries of
material life, were enjoyed near you; I think of you and of your
wandering colony as one thinks of happiness, and since I left you I
have lived only the burning life of unfortunate artists.

Was M. Hanski gratified by my attention? You shall have, madame, an
edition for yourself; an edition which I shall try to make ravishing,
and in which there will be a secret coquetry. Ah! if I had had your
features I would have pleased myself in having them engraved as La
Fosseuse. But though I have memory enough for myself, I should not have
enough for a painter.

Day before yesterday, I had a visit from Wolff, the pianist from
Geneva. I could have thrown the house out of windows for joy. Was it
not he who asked me: "Who is that admirable lady?" So the poor lad
found me very cordial, very splendidly hospitable. To see him was to
fancy myself back in Pré-l'Évêque, ten steps from your house, and
breathing the Genevese air.

I hope to be able to write you more at length a few days hence. I
reserve to myself the right to write my tragedy at Wierzchownia. I
have amused myself like a boy in naming a Pole M. de Wierzchownia, and
bringing him on the scene in the "Recherche de l'Absolu." That was a
longing I could not resist, and I beg your pardon and that of M. Hanski
for the great liberty. You couldn't believe how that printed name
fascinates me.

What a good winter to be far from the annoyances of Paris, absorbed in
a tragedy, struggling with a tragedy, laughing every evening with you
and making the master laugh, for whom I'll invent "Contes Drolatiques"
expressly for him! If I have to get to you through driving snow-storms
I shall come! And after that, I'll go to the Emperor Nicholas himself
to obtain permission for you to come to Paris and see the fiasco of my
play!

Adieu, you who are seeing every day new countries, while I can see but
one! I hope Anna is well, and that M. Hanski has none of his _black
dragons_, that Mademoiselle Borel smiles, that Susette sings, that
Mademoiselle Séverine still retains her graceful indifference, and you,
madame, that vigorous constitution which is a principle of living joys;
but also of pains; my desire is that God shall take all sorrow from
your cup. Do not forget to tell me where you will stay after Trieste.

I send you a thousand flowers of the soul and of affection.



PARIS, July 13, 1834.

It is now a long time, madame, since I beheld your pretty writing,
and my solitude seems to me deeper, my toil more heavy. I gaze with a
gloomy air at that box in which you sent me jujubes, which now holds my
wafers.

Are you in Venice? Are you at Trieste? Are you travelling? Are you
resting? You see, I think of you, and I do not want to waste all the
reveries into which I plunge, so I send you one. Oh! I am so bored in
Paris! Never did its atmosphere so weigh upon me. I breathe in fancy
the air you breathe with an enthusiastic jealousy! It is, they say, so
light, it would suit my lungs so well. _Mon Dieu!_ work is crushing
me, and for all hippogriff I have only that jujube-box and Anna's
dog-inkstand, poor little dear!

I am writing at this moment a fine work, the "Recherche de l'Absolu;" I
tell you nothing about it; I want you to read it without bias, and with
all the freshness of ignorance of its subject. Where will you be then?

My business affairs are cursed. Nothing comes to a conclusion. That
ambulating roast-beef, into whom God has thrown all the thoughts that
make for silliness, called Gosselin, stops us by petty things. Next
Tuesday we may end the matter, perhaps; I will immediately write to
you. Put on one side thirty-seven thousand francs to pay, and on the
other side twenty-eight francs' worth of paper, a bottle of ink, and
a few quill-pens I have just bought, and you will have an idea of my
position, assets, and debts. To reach an equilibrium, I need iron
health, not talent, but _luck_ in my talent. Six volumes more for the
said Bêchet to publish, and twenty-five 12mos for the first edition of
the "Études Philosophiques"! After all that is done, I shall have a few
crowns left and "liberty on the mountain." When I say on the mountain,
I mean plain, for the Ukraine is, you say, a flat country.

There are my affairs, madame. As for sentiments, they are, by reason of
restraint, a thousand times more violent than you ever knew them since
you have consented to be my confidant. But that person would be very
content if she knew all that I hide from her, for it is very difficult
to express sentiments that lie at the bottom of one's heart. They
need, not only a tête-à-tête, but a heart-to-heart. Mingle with this
fury of work a _furia d'amore_ and a fury of business and a few good
memories which come to me when I listen to good music--trying not to
hear the Duke of Brunswick, who germanizes in my box sometimes; for
this dethroned prince, being no longer a lion, makes himself a tiger
with us. (You will not catch that poor joke if I did not tell you that
our box is called the _tiger_ box. Forgive the digression, but I know
how you like to know all the little details of Parisian life.) So now
you have an exact view of the meagre existence your moujik lives;
he is, for the rest, as virtuous as a young girl. The "Recherche de
l'Absolu" will tell you that; "Séraphita" better still.

Truly, I am writing with a gay pen, and I am sad; but my sadness
is so great that I am afraid to send you the expression of it. I
would sell my fame and all my literary baggage (if I had no debts)
for the pebbles on the road to Ferney. If you would buy my books in
bulk I would write them for you little by little, or tell them to
you in the chimney-corner. Make M. Hanski buy a principality, for I
should not like to be jester to any but a prince; self-loves should
be conciliated. You could give me such pretty caps and bells! As for
salary, I would take it in the laughs that would come from your lips.
But you would be expected to give me eulogies and lodgings, cakes and
bells. No Barkschy; I make conditions. But a fool would have to hide
his heart. Well, well, you would not want me. _Mon Dieu!_ how often in
my life I have envied Prince Lutin! [Puck.]

I wish you all enjoyments of your journey. I must now go and finish a
"Conte Drolatique" while you are getting into the carriage and saying,
perhaps: "I did not think that this Frenchman whom I accused of levity
on our way to the lake of Bienne was so sincere when he told me he was
capable of attachment." Ah! madame, poor men have only a heart, and
they give it; I am a poor man, a manual labourer who works in phrases
as others carry a hod.

If I were free, I should bathe to-night in the Adriatic, and then go
and tell you some joyous tale, review the ducal houses in the "Almanach
de Gotha," or play patience. You made me adore patience--and I live by
patience. But I drudge, I suffer much.



PARIS, July 15, 1834.

I wish you to find this letter on your arrival in Vienna. Day before
yesterday I posted a letter to you in Trieste, and ten minutes
later your good long letter from Trieste came. Ah! that, indeed, is
writing! That is making some one happy! Boor Alphonse Royer, who wrote
"Venezia la bella," did not tell me in two volumes what you have told
me about Venice in two pages. I said to a friend who came in just
as I was putting your letter into the pretty box I have had made to
hold them,--for to me your letters are beings, fairies which bring
me a thousand delights; I am dainty for my fairy-letters,---I said
to him: "We are ninnies, we who think we can write. We ought to kiss
the slippers of certain women, the side where the slippers touch the
ground, for within, none but the angels are worthy of that!"

Thanks for your letter; how many things I want to answer and must put
off to another day, not wishing to speak now, except of things I have
much at heart.

You have not understood me about "Séraphita." I declare to you that
I have more jealousy of heart than you accuse me of; for if, after
promising me a testimonial of friendship, you were to forget it, I
should suffer in all that is most sensitive in heart and soul and body.
Therefore, I wanted to avoid the same suffering to you by explaining
that the _envoi_ would be in the last article, to make my happiness
the more transcendant. That last chapter, the "Transfiguration," is to
me what, in its own degree, the picture was to Raffaelle. Leave me the
right to put your name upon my picture at the moment when the almost
gigantic conception of that work is about to be comprehended. But,
after reading your letter, I think there was conceit in my thinking you
would suffer. _Basta!_ I will say no more about it.

The second number of "Séraphita" has been, for three weeks, in the
printing-office, and I have worked ten hours a day upon it. I will send
you the whole of it to Vienna, addressed to M. Sina. It will all be out
by the end of September.

Another quarrel. I would rather be happy in a corner than be Washington
in France, seeing that we have dozens of Washingtons in every street.
That means that I would rather be at Wierzchownia in January than
sputtering politics in the tribune of the Palais-Bourbon. This is by
way of answer to your sublime _retrocessa_, when you wish to efface
yourself behind France. As for me, I efface France beneath your sublime
forehead. France, madame, is never short of great orators, great
ministers, and great men in everything.

Well, the Gosselin affair is signed; I am quit to-day of that nightmare
of foolishness. The illustrious Werdet (who slightly resembles the
illustrious Gaudissart) buys from me the first edition of the "Études
Philosophiques,"--twenty-five 12mo volumes,--in five Parts, each of
five volumes, to appear, month by month, August, September, October,
November. You see that to carry this through, and do three Parts of
the "Études de Mœurs," still due to Madame Bêchet, requires Vesuvius
in the brain, a torso of iron, good pens, quantities of ink, not
the slightest blue devil, and a constant desire to see, in January,
Strasburg, Cologne, Vienna, Brody, etc., and to fight with snow-drifts.
I do not mention that bagatelle called _health_, nor that other
bagatelle called _talent_.

Now you know the programme of my life, and if I had _a lady of my
thoughts_ you must own she would be much to be pitied, unhappy woman!
Fortunately, she is, very sadly, the lady of my thoughts only; and I
know she is very joyful to find me hindered.

For all this fine work M. Werdet is to give me fifteen thousand francs,
and whatever of glorification I can catch above the bargain. This,
joined to the rest of the "Études de Mœurs," will free me entirely,
and leave me with a few crowns, which are in this low world, the wings
on which we fly o'er distances.

Do you know why I am so gay that there is gaiety in my grumblings?
It is that I have seen once more the pretty little scribble of your
writing; that I know you to be, except for the sufferings of travel,
perfectly well, and Anna too.

Adieu, a thousand tender feelings of the heart. Ah! be reassured.
Madame de C... insists that she has never loved any one but M. de M...,
and that she loves him still, that Artemisia of Ephesus. This evening I
say good-bye, at Liszt's, to Wolff, that young face from Geneva--where
I was so young!

When you write to me from Vienna, tell me, I entreat you, how long you
stay. Something tells me that I shall see Vienna with you; that means
that I shall like Vienna. You must tell me what the Germans think of
"Séraphita." You will receive, in Vienna, the third Part of the "Études
de Mœurs," which leaves here, addressed to M. Sina (_mon Dieu!_ how I
do like that name!), about the end of this month. So you will have it
during the first ten days of August.

A thousand tender regards.



PARIS, July 30, 1834.

Oh! my angel, my love, my life, my happiness, my strength, my treasure,
my beloved, what horrible restraint! what joy to write to you heart to
heart! what shame to me if you do not find these lines at the time and
place! I have been into the country for six days to finish something in
a hurry.

_Ohimé_, I cannot start for the Baths of Baden before August 10; but
I will go like the wind; it is impossible to tell you more, for to be
able to go there needs giant efforts. But I love you with superhuman
force.

So from the 10th to the 15th I shall be on the road. I shall have only
three or four days to myself, but I bring you that drop of my ardent
life with a happiness which the infinite of heaven can alone explain.

_Mon Dieu!_ what hours full of you, of which you have only
presentiments! How I have followed you everywhere! How I have, at all
hours, desired you! Yes, my cherished Eve, my celestial flower, my
beautiful life, stay at the Baths till September. If it takes eight
days to get there, and I leave here August 15th, I shall only arrive
on the 23rd, and I must be here for the first days in September. All
depends on my work and my payments. The desire to be free, to be yours,
has made me undertake things beyond my strength. But my love is so
great; it sustains me.

Your "Séraphita" is beautiful, grand, and you will enjoy that work in
three months. I need three months for the last chapter; but perhaps
I will finish it near you. You warmed up my heart for the first; you
ought to hear the last song!

Oh! dear, dearest adored one, tell yourself well that the love you
have inspired in me is the infinite. Have neither fear nor jealousy.
_Nothing_ can destroy the charm under which I wish to live. Yes, there
have been many melancholies, many sadnesses: I was a displanted tree.
To see you in August restores to me happiness and courage.

Now, to come to Baden I must bring out in the "Revue de Paris" "Le
Cabinet des Antiques," of which you know the beginning. To work to go
to see you, oh, what enjoyment! There is no work, there is joy in every
line.

Did you receive the "Chouans" at Trieste? But you cannot answer me.
You will receive this August 8 in Vienna, and the 10th I shall start.
What are Neufchâtel and Geneva in comparison with Baden? Were there six
months of desires, of repressed love, of works written in your name,
oh, my life, my thought? One must be strong to sustain a joy so long
awaited. Oh, yes, be alone!

It is impossible to write you a long letter; it would take a day more,
as I only arrived this morning, and I feared that Marie de Verneuil
might not find it and be vexed with him who adores her as an angel
loves God. To be separated from you by only eighteen days; it is all,
and it is nothing. Your little letter has made me crazy. It will be a
great imprudence to go to Baden, for I have a thousand ducats to pay in
September, but to see you one day, to kiss that idolized forehead, to
smell that loved hair, which I wear about my neck, to take that hand so
full of kindness and love, to see you! that is worth all glories, all
fortunes. If it were not upon us, upon a longer time of separation that
this folly falls, it would not be a folly, it would be quite simple.

Dear angel, do you know what happiness there is for me in these
eighteen days, and the journey, _mon Dieu!_ I adore you night and
morning, I send you all the thoughts of my soul, I surround you with
my heart,--do you feel nothing? And my sufferings in not going to
Florence, in short, I will tell you all.

Dear angel, be happy if the most ardent love, the most infinite that
man can feel, is the life you have desired to have, give, receive.

_À bientôt_, then. Oh! what a word! Three or four days of happiness
will make the months of absence more supportable. Oh! my treasure, what
an abyss for me is tenderness. You are the principle of this frightful
courage. Will you love my white hairs? Every one is astonished that any
one can produce what I produce, and says that I shall die. No; three
days near you is to recover life and strength for a thousand years!

Adieu; a thousand kisses. I have held this bit of vinca between my lips
while writing. To thee, my white _minette_, and soon. A thousand tender
caresses, and in each a thousand more![1]

[Footnote 1: This is the last of these odious and ridiculous letters.
It belongs properly to the series which ended March 11, 1834. In my
opinion it has been concocted and placed under this date to convey the
idea that it is one of the letters which Balzac mentions in his letter
to M. Hanski of September 16 (see p. 199); and, furthermore, this is
done with the intention of convincing the reader that the whole series
of forged letters (which are plainly identical in character with this
letter) were written by Balzac.

Putting aside, for a moment, the _proofs_ of deception which I have
produced, I must say in conclusion that I think no one of literary
judgment will believe that the author of the "Comédie Humaine" wrote
these spurious letters.

From this date the letters go on in Balzac's characteristic
manner,--expansive, impulsive, boyish at times, and too full,
certainly, of his debts and his troubles; but with it all is the strong
underflow of a great and dauntless soul allied to things pure and
noble. The story is tragic; and not the least tragic part of it is the
wicked present attempt of degenerate men to degrade a hero.

I here place a letter of the same date from Monsieur Hanski to Balzac,
which will serve to show the sort of man he was, and how he regarded
his own and his wife's friendship for Balzac.

I now leave the whole subject to the judgment of the reader.--TR.]



FROM M. HANSKI TO M. HONORÉ DE BALZAC.

VIENNA, August 3, 1834.

I have just received, monsieur, the copy of the "Médecin de
campagne,"--that one of your works which I like best; the real merit
of which I could wish were felt and recognized at its just value. I
allowed myself, some time ago, to write to you fully on the impression
this book made upon me; therefore I will not return to it, but simply
beg you to receive my thanks for so precious a souvenir of your good
friendship. My wife has told you, no doubt, of the way I was taken in
by the "Moniteur." But explain to us who your legitimist homonym is who
is made deputy from Villefranche? We thought there was for France, as
for us, only one M. de Balzac; and, in that conviction, I was preparing
a long letter of congratulation. In it I spoke of a _certain cause_
[he means that of the Duchesse de Berry, then imprisoned at Blaye], of
which, knowing your generous heart, I hoped to see you the champion.
But, at the sweetest moment of these illusory dreams, my wife brought
me your letter, and told me that you were not a deputy. Disappointed,
I cursed the fatality that presides over the things of this world; I
consigned my fine epistle to the flames, and the blue devils returned
in troops to assail me.

But adieu, monsieur; my wife is, no doubt, writing you a long gossip.
More at this time would bore you. I therefore end, assuring you of all
my friendship.

VENCESLAS HANSKI.



To MADAME HANSKA.


PARIS, August 1--August 4, 1834.

I have received your letter, written from Vienna, madame. You have
probably received two from me, addressed to J. Collioud, with the
"Chouans" and the "Médecin de campagne." Distances are so little
calculable. I believe that up to the present time I have had such
true sympathies that my inspirations have always been like those of my
friends. I have forgotten nothing,--neither Marie de Verneuil, nor your
"Chouans," nor M. Hanski, who will have his "Médecin de campagne."

I am a little chagrined. The imbeciles of Paris declare me crazy in
view of the second number of "Séraphita," whereas the elevated minds
are secretly jealous of it. I am worn out with work. Too much is too
much. For three days past I have been seized by unconquerable sleep,
which shows the last degree of cerebral weariness. I dare not tell you
what an effort I am making now to write to you. I have a plumophobia,
an inkophobia, which amount to suffering. However, I hope to finish my
third Part by August 15. It will have cost me much. And for that reason
I am afraid of some heaviness in the style and in the conception. You
must judge.

The "Cabinet des Antiques" will appear in the "Revue de Paris," between
the second number of "Séraphita" and the last, for the "Revue" makes
the sacrifice of holding the latter back till I can finish it. You know
the beginning of the "Cabinet des Antiques." It made one of our good
evenings in Geneva.

Let M. Hanski console himself; I shall be deputy in 1839, and then I
can better, being free of all care and all worries, act so as to render
my country some service, if I am worth anything. Between now and then I
expect to be able to rule in European questions by means of a political
publication. We will talk about that.

I have had many troubles. My brother made a bad marriage in the Indies,
and the poor boy has neither spirit, energy, nor talent. Men of will
are rare!

I shall go to see you in Vienna if I can get twenty days to myself; a
pretty watch given at the right moment to Madame Bêchet may win me a
month's freedom. I am going to overwhelm her with gifts to get peace.

I have many troubles, many worries. The kind M. Hanski would not
have his black butterflies if he were in my place. My second line of
operations is now to be drawn out. I shall have the first Part of the
"Études Philosophiques" printed within ten days. It will appear at the
same time as the third Part of the "Études de Mœurs." There is but God
and I, and the third person, who is never named, who are in the secret
of these works which affright literature. I have sixty thousand volumes
this year in the commerce of publishers, and I shall have earned
seventy thousand francs. Hence, hatreds. But, alas! of those seventy
thousand francs nothing will remain to me but the happiness of being
free of all debt after being ruined by it.

You are very fortunate, madame, to be able to take the Danube baths;
but write me soon if they are removing those frightful nervous
headaches which frightened me so much. Do not suffer. Preserve your
health. When you walk, do not wear those little shoes that let in
water, as they did the day we went to Ferney.

Do you know I feel a little vexed with you that you can think that a
man who has _my faith and my will_ can change, after all I have written
to you. In the matter of money alone I do not do all I would; but in
whatever belongs to the heart, to the feelings, in all that is _the
man_ you can have few reproaches to make to me.

Write me, very legibly, your addresses in Vienna and Baden, for I find
it impossible to make out the name of the hotel where you are now.

I am to see, some day soon, an illustrious Pole, Wronsky, great
mathematician, great mystic, great mechanician, but whose conduct
has irregularities which the law calls swindling; though, if closely
viewed, they are seen to be the effects of dreadful poverty and a
genius so superior that one can hardly blame him. He has, they say, one
of the most powerful intellects in Europe.


Monday, 4.

I have been forced to interrupt my letter for a day and a half; I have
not had two minutes to myself to collect my thoughts. There has been a
deluge of hurried proofs and corrections; ouf! I beg you to recall me
to the memory of all who compose your caravan.

Our Paris is very flat, very sad. MM. Thiers and Rigny have, they say,
lost five millions at the Bourse, in consequence of the invasion that
Don Carlos has made all alone. Every one talks war here, but no one
believes in it. The king has dismissed Soult in order to remain at
peace.

Adieu. I hope, madame, that you will amuse yourself at the Baths, and
gain health; but you must walk a little. My life is so monotonous that
I can tell you little of myself that is worth telling. One thought and
work, that is the life of your moujik. You--you are seeing countries,
you have the movement of travel which occupies and diverts. Ah! if I
could travel, I would go to Moravia.

Adieu. If you hear anything in the air, if a pebble rolls at your feet,
if a light sparkles, tell yourself that my spirit and my heart are
frolicking in Germany. Wholly yours,

HONORÉ.



PARIS, August 11, 1834.

Thank you, madame, for your good and amiable letter of the 3rd of this
month. The envelope delighted me with its hieroglyphics, in which you
have put such religious ideas.

I have many answers to give you. But a thousand million wafts
of incense for your ideas on "Philippe le Discret." You share my
sentiments on Schiller and my ideas of what I ought to do.

Oh! spend the winter in Vienna? I shall be there, yes--You have the
books? Good.

No, I see no one, neither man nor woman. My _tigers_ bore me; they have
neither claws nor brains. Besides, I seldom go to the Opera now.

How sweet your letter is! with what happiness I have read it! that
description of your house, the flowers, the garden, your life so well
arranged, even the blue devils on the watch for M. Hanski. Thank you
for all the details you give me.

At the moment when I was reading the religious part of your letter,
that where the good thoughts went to my heart, my Carmelite nuns, who
had opened the windows of their chapel on account of the heat, began
to sing a hymn which crossed our little street and my courtyard. I was
strangely moved. Your writing gleamed in my eyes and softly entered
my heart, more living than ever. This is not poesy, but one of those
realities that are rare in life.

"La Recherche de l'Absolu" kills me. It is an immense subject; the
finest book I can do, say _some_. Alas! I shall not be through with
it before the 20th of this month, in nine days. After that, I spread
my wings and take a three weeks' furlough, for my head cannot sustain
another idea. On the 21st I shout: "Vive l'Almanach de Gotha!" God
grant that ten days later I present to you myself the "Absolu." I will
not tell you anything about it. That's an author's coquetry, which you
will pardon when you lay down the book.

My life, it is fifteen hours' toil, proofs, author's anxieties, phrases
to polish; but, there's a distant gleam, a hope which lights me.

At last, France is beginning to bestir itself about my books. Fame
will come too late; I prefer happiness. I want to be something great
to increase the enjoyments of the person loved. I can only say that to
you. You understand me and you will not be jealous of that thought.

Madame de Castries is dying; the paralysis has attacked the other leg.
Her beauty is no more; she is blighted. Oh! I pity her. She suffers
horribly and inspires pity only. She is the only person I go to see,
and then for one hour every week. It is more than I really can do, but
that hour is compelled by the sight of that slow death. She lives with
a cataplasm of Burgundy pitch from the nape of the neck to the loins. I
give you these details because you ask for them.

So, constant labour, sundry griefs, the condition of Madame de Berny,
who, on her side, droops her head like a flower when its calyx is heavy
with rain. She cannot bear up under her last sorrows. Never did a woman
have more to endure. Will she come safely out of these crises? I weep
tears of blood in thinking that she is necessarily in the country,
while I am necessarily in Paris. Great sorrows are preparing for me.
That gentle spirit, that dear creature who put me in her heart, like
the child she most loved, is perishing, while our affection (that of
her eldest son, and mine) can do nothing to allay her wounds? Oh!
madame, if death takes this light from my life, be good and generous,
receive me. I could think only of going to weep near you. You are the
only person (Borget and Madame Carraud excepted) in whom I have found
the true and sanctifying friendship. In case she dies, France would be
horrible to me. Borget is away; Madame Carraud has not, in herself,
the feminine softness that one needs. Hers is an antique rectitude, a
reasoning friendship which has its angles. You _feel_, you!

Yes, I am overwhelmed by this sorrow which approaches; and that divine
soul prepares me for it, so to speak, in the few lines she is able to
write to me. Yes, I have only your heart into which I can shed the
tears that are in my eyes while writing this in Paris.[1] I am horribly
alone; no one knows the secrets of my heart. I suffer, and before
others I smile. Neither my sister nor my mother comprehend me.

These are sad pages. I have some hope. Mme. de Berny has such a rich
constitution; but her age makes me tremble; a heart so young in a body
that is nearly sixty, that is, indeed, a violent contrast. She has
dreadful inflammations between the heart and lungs. My hand, when I
magnetize her, increases the inflammation. We were obliged, therefore,
to renounce that means of cure; for, as I wrote you, I was able to
spend ten days with her the last of July. Oh! be well yourself! you and
yours! Let me not tremble for the only beings who are dear to me, for
all, at once!

I needed your letter this morning, for this morning I received a
letter from a mutual friend of Madame Bêchet and me, telling me of her
commercial distresses. If my book is not ready to appear she wants
compensation for the delay; the "Absolu" _ought_ to have been finished
in two months! That irritated me. I was weeping with rage--for he does
weep, this _tiger_; he cries out, this eagle!--when your letter came.
It fell into my heart like dew. I blessed you. I clasped you like a
friend. You serened me, you refreshed my soul. Be happy. Shall I ever
cause you a like joy? No, I shall always be your debtor in this way.

I have had other griefs. My Boileau [M. Charles Lemesle], my
hypercritic, my friend, who judges and corrects me without appeal,
has found a good many blunders in the first two 12mo volumes of the
"Médecin de campagne." That makes me desperate. However, we will take
them out. The work shall, some day, be perfect. I was ill for two days
after he showed me those blunders. They are real. We are washing up
between us "La Peau de Chagrin." There must be no faults left on that
edition. Add to all this money anxieties, which will not leave me
tranquil till January, 1835, and there you have all the secrets of my
life. There is one about which I do not speak to you. That one is the
very spring of my life; it is my azure heaven, my hope, my courage, my
strength, my star; it is all that one cannot tell, but it is that which
you will divine. It is the oleander, the rose-bay tree, a lovely form
adored beneath it, the twilight hour, a revery!

Adieu; I return to my furrow, my plough, my goad, and I shout to my
oxen, "Hue!" I am just now writing the _death of Madame Claës_. I write
to you between that scene of sorrow entitled the Death of a Mother,
and the chapter entitled, Devotions of Youth. Remember this. Remember
that between these two chapters your greeting, your letter, full of
friendship, came to give me back a little courage and drive away a
thousand gloomy phantoms. _There_ you were, shining like a star.

The happy husband, no longer _coquebin_ Spachmann, will bind the
manuscript which you must put with that of "Eugénie Grandet." As for
that of the "Duchesse de Langeais," it has been dispersed, I don't know
how. I am very careless about my manuscripts. You had to set a value
upon them which made me proud, in order to make me keep them for you.
So with those of "Séraphita," I am like a mother defending her young.

Do you know what courage there is in calling one's self legitimist?
That party is very abject. The three parties that divide France have
all descended into the mud. Oh! my poor country! I am humiliated,
unhappy at all this. We shall rise out of it, I hope.

I send you no commonplaces. To tell you that I keep in reserve a
thousand sincere and gentle, tender feelings would be nothing; a
feeble portion, indeed, of a friendship which makes me conceive of the
infinite. May the Danube make you strong and give you health; I love
the Danube better than I love the Seine.

I have seen Prince Puckler Muskau here, and he seemed to me a little
Mephistophelean, sprinkled with Voltaireanism. He told me that I was
much appreciated in Berlin, and that if I went there--Ha! ha! bravi!
brava!--But what I like in foreign lands is the good nonsense that I
shall talk in the chimney-corner of 73 Landstrasse.

Adieu; distribute my friendship, regards, and remembrances to those
about you as you will.

[Footnote 1: Compare this with the shameful letter supposed to have
been written about her to Mme. Hanska, Jan. 1834. See p. 112.--TR.]



PARIS, August 20, 1834.

Yesterday I had an inflammation of the brain, in consequence of my too
hard work; but, by the merest chance, I was with my mother, who had
a phial of _balm tranquil_, and bathed my head with it. I suffered
horribly for nine or ten hours. I am better to-day. The doctor wants me
to travel for two months. My unfortunate affairs allow me only twenty
days. I have still ten days' work on the "Recherche de l'Absolu," which
has, like "Louis Lambert," two years ago, very nearly carried me off.
But on the 1st or 2nd of September I shall be on my way to see Vienna.
Impossible to give myself a more agreeable object for a journey. So,
between the 7th and 10th, I shall have the pleasure, you will let me
say happiness, of seeing you.

No, I have had no more letters from your cousin. Something that I do
not know must have made her quarrel with me.

I think as you do on Lamennais' work, "Les Paroles d'un Croyant." I
nearly got myself devoured for saying that from a literary point of
view the form was mere silliness, and that Volney and Byron had already
employed it, and that as to doctrines, they were all taken from the
Saint-Simonians. Really, those kings on a slimy, evil-smelling rock are
only fit for children.

Adieu; you will be indulgent to a poor artist who rattles on with the
intention of having no thought, of being very boyish, and desires only
to let himself go to the one affection that never wearies: friendship
and the sweetest things of the heart. Thank M. Hanski in advance for
his good little letter. At this moment I have no strength to write more
than what I do here. That strength is what in the eighteenth century
they would have called "force of sentiment."

I am so glad to know that you are well lodged and pleased with your
house.



PARIS, August 25, 1834.

I may have alarmed you, madame, but Madame de Berny is better. She
is not recovered, however. No, she remains in a condition of cruel
weakness.

Two days ago I wrote that I should start for Germany; but that was
folly, for it takes ten or twelve days to get to Vienna, as much to
return, and I have but twenty to dispose of. No, it is not possible in
the situation in which I am. "La Recherche de l'Absolu" consumes so
much time that I find myself in arrears in all my deliveries of copy,
consequently in all my payments.

On another hand, I cannot go without leaving the end of "Séraphita" for
the "Revue de Paris," and how can I determine the time it will take me
to finish that work, angelical to some, diabolical to me?

All this worries me; I cannot have my liberty till the month of
November, and then will you still be in Vienna? Yes. But I shall have
only a month to myself, and the question will still be the same. I see
how it is; I must wait till "Philippe II. is done."

I have the weakness and the species of physical melancholy that comes
from abuse of toil. The life of Paris no longer suits me; and while I
feel in my heart a veritable childhood, all that is exterior is aging.
I begin to understand Metternichism in whatever is not the sole and
only sentiment by which I live.

A book has just appeared, very fine for certain souls, often
ill-written, feeble, cowardly, diffuse, which all the world has
proscribed, but which I have read courageously, and in which there are
fine things. It is "Volupté" by Sainte-Beuve. Whoso has not had his
Madame de Couaën is not worthy to live. There are in that dangerous
friendship with a married woman beside whom the soul crouches, rises,
abases itself, is undecided, never resolving on audacity, desiring the
wrong, not committing it, all the delicious emotions of early youth.
In this book there are fine sentences, fine pages, but nothing. It is
the nothing that I like, the nothing that permits me to mingle myself
with it. Yes, the first woman that one meets with the illusions of
youth is something holy and sacred. Unfortunately, there is not in
this book the enticing joyousness, the liberty, the imprudence which
characterize passions in France. The book is puritanical. Madame de
Couaën is not sufficiently a woman, and the danger does not exist. But
I regard the book as very treacherously dangerous. There are so many
precautions taken to represent the passion as weak that we suspect it
of being immense; the rarity of the pleasures renders them infinite in
their short and slight apparitions. The book has made me make a great
reflection. Woman has a duel with man: if she does not triumph, she
dies; if she is not right, she dies; if she is not happy, she dies. It
is appalling.

I have real need of seeing Vienna. I must explore the fields of Wagram
and Essling before next June. I specially want engravings which show
the uniforms of the German army, and I must go in search of them. Have
the kindness to tell me merely if such things exist.

To-day, 25th, it is almost twelve days since I have received any
letters from you. I live in such isolation that I count upon and look
eagerly for the pleasures that come into my desert. Alas! Madame de
Berny's illness has cast me into horrible thoughts. That angelic
creature who, since 1821, has shed the fragrance of heaven into my
life is transformed; she is turning to ice. Tears, griefs, and I can
do nothing. One daughter become insane, another daughter dead, a third
dying, what blows!--And a wound more violent still, of which nothing
can be told. And at last, after thirty years of patience and devotion,
she is forced to separate from her husband under pain of dying if she
remains with him. All this in a short space of time. This is what I
suffer through the heart that created me.

Then, in Berry, Madame Carraud's life is in peril through her
pregnancy. Borget is in Italy. My mother is in despair about my
brother's marriage; she has aged twenty years in twenty days. I am
hemmed in by enormous, obligatory work, and by money cares, also by two
little lawsuits which I have brought to solve the last difficulties of
my literary life.

For all this one needs, as my doctor says, a skull of iron. Unhappily,
the heart may burst the skull. I counted on the trip to Vienna as the
traveller counts on the oasis in the desert; but the impossibility of
it faces me. I must be in Paris from the 20th to the 30th of September.
I have then to pay five hundred ducats, and when one digs the soil with
a pen gold is rare. However, labour will suffice. I shall be free in a
few months, if the abuse of study does not kill me. I begin to fear it.


Tuesday, 26.

To-day I have finished "La Recherche de l'Absolu." Heaven grant that
the work be good and beautiful. I cannot judge of it; I am too weary
with toil, too exhausted by the fatigues of conception. I see only
the reverse side of the canvas. Everything in it is pure. Conjugal
love is here a sublime passion. The love of the young girl is fresh.
It is the Home, at its source. You will read it. You will also read
"Souffrances inconnues," which have cost me four months' labour. They
are forty pages of which I could not write but two sentences a day. It
is a horrible cry, without brilliancy of style, without pretensions
to drama. There are too many thoughts in it, and too much drama to
show on the outside. It is enough to make you shudder, and it is all
true. Never have I been so stirred by any work. It is more than "La
Grenadière," more than "La Femme abandonnée."

At the present moment I am making the final corrections of style on the
"Peau de Chagrin." I reprint it and remove the last blemishes. Oh! my
sixteen hours a day are well employed! I go to the Opera only once a
week now.

Day before yesterday Madame Sand, or Dudevant, just returned from
Italy, met me in the _foyer_ of the Opera, and we took two or three
turns together. I was to breakfast with her the next day, but I could
not go. To-day I have had Sandeau to breakfast, who told me that the
day after that woman abandoned him he took such a quantity of acetate
of morphia that his stomach rejected it, and threw it up without there
having been the slightest absorption. I was sorry I had not received
the confidences of Madame George Sand. He regretted it too,---Jules
Sandeau. The poor lad is very unhappy at this moment. I have advised
him to come and take Borget's room, and share with me until he can
make himself an existence with his plays. That is what has most struck
me the last few days.

Well, I must bid you adieu, and this adieu, in place of the _au revoir
bientôt_ on which I had counted, saddens me to a point I cannot
express. Remember me to all about you. I shall write next to M. Hanski
to thank him for his letter, and explain to him that the present
parliament will be, for the next five years, insignificant. All the
European questions in connection with France are postponed till 1839.

A thousand constant regards.



FROM H. DE BALZAC TO M. HANSKI.

PARIS, September 16, 1834.

MONSIEUR,--I should be in despair if you would not undertake my defence
towards Madame Hanska, though I feel, indeed, that even if she would
deign to forget two letters which she has the right to think more
than improper, the friendship she would then have the goodness to
give me would never be like that with which she honoured me before my
culpability. Nothing restores a broken tie, the join shows always; an
indelible distrust remains.

But permit me to explain to you, the only person to whom I can speak of
this, the mistake which gave rise to what I shall always regard in my
life as a misfortune. But consider for a moment the boyish, laughing
nature that I have, and on which I would not now intrench myself if I
had not made you know it; it is because I have been with you as I am
with myself, with the person I love best, that I justify myself.

Together with this hearty boyishness there is pride. From any other I
would rather receive a sword-thrust, were it even mortal, than lower
myself to explain what I have done. But to mend the chain, to-day
broken, of an affection that was dear to me, I don't know what I would
not do.

Madame Hanska is, indeed, the purest nature, the most childlike, the
gravest, the gayest, the best educated, the most saintly and the most
philosophical that I know, and I have been won to her by all that I
love best. I have told her the secret of my affections, so that I could
always be with her as I wished.

One evening, in jest, she said to me that she would like to know what
a love-letter was. This was said wholly without meaning, for at the
moment it referred to a letter I had been writing that morning to
a lady whom I will not name. But I said, laughing: "A letter from
Montauran to Marie de Verneuii?" and we joked about it.

Being at Trieste, Madame Hanska wrote me: "Have you forgotten Marie
de Verneuii?" (I saw she referred to the "Chouans," for which she
was impatient) and I wrote those two unfortunate letters to Vienna,
supposing that she remembered our joke, and replying to her that she
would find Marie de Verneuii in Vienna.

You could never believe how shocked I was at my folly when she answered
me coldly on account of the first, when I knew there was a second; and
when I received the three lines that she wrote me, of which, perhaps,
you are ignorant, I was truly in despair.

For myself, monsieur, I would give you satisfaction; it is very
indifferent to me to be or not to be (from man to man); but I should
be, for the rest of my days, the most unhappy man in the world if this
childish folly harmed, in any way, Madame Hanska; and that is what
makes me write to you thus.

Therefore, on my part there was neither vanity nor presumption, nor
anything whatever that is contemptible. I wrote (admitting myself to
blame) things that were unintelligible to Madame Hanska. I am here
in a situation of dependence that excludes all evil interpretation;
besides which, Madame Hanska's negligence is a very noble proof of my
folly and her sanctity. That is what consoles me.

I earnestly desire, monsieur, that these explanations, so natural,
should reach you; for though Madame Hanska has forbidden me to write to
her, and said that she was leaving for Petersburg, I imagine that you
will still be in Vienna to receive this letter, or that M. Sina will
send it to you.

Tell her from me, monsieur, how profoundly humiliated I am--not to be
grossly mistaken, for I never thought to do more than continue the
jokes we made on the shores of the lake of Geneva when we talked of the
Incroyables, but--to have caused her the slightest grief. She is so
good, so completely innocent, that she will pardon me perhaps for what
I shall never pardon myself. I am becoming once more truly a moujik.

As for you, monsieur, if I had to justify myself to you, you will
understand that I should not do it. _Mon Dieu!_ I was so seriously
occupied that I lost precious moments in writing those two letters I
now desire to annihilate.

If friendship, even if lost, still has its rights, would you have the
kindness to present to Madame Hanska, from me, the third Part of the
"Études de Mœurs," which I finished yesterday, and which will appear
Thursday, September 18? You will find the manuscripts and the volumes
with M. Sina, to whom I addressed them.

If Madame Hanska, or you, monsieur, do not think this proper, I beg you
to burn the manuscripts and the volumes. I should not like that what I
destined for Madame Hanska at a time when she thought me worthy of her
friendship should exist and go into other hands.

"Séraphita," which belongs to her also, will be finished in the "Revue
de Paris," September 25. I dare not send it to her without knowing
whether she would accept it. I shall await your answer, and silence
will be one. As "Séraphita" will be immediately published in a volume,
I shall, if she is merciful, make her the humble dedication of this
work by putting her arms and name on the first leaf, with these simple
words: "This page is dedicated to Madame H... by the author;" and she
shall receive, at any place you indicate, the volume and the manuscript.

However it be, and even if Madame Hanska offers me a generous and
complete pardon, I feel that I shall always have I know not what in
my soul to embarrass me. So, though I have made to this precious
friendship the greatest of sacrifices in writing the present
letter--for it contains things humiliating to me, and which cost me
dear--I am destined, no doubt, never to see you again, and I may
therefore express to you my keen regrets. I have not so many affections
round me that I can lose one without tears. I was never so young, so
truly "nineteen years old," as I was with her. But I shall have the
consolation to grow, to do better, to become something so powerful, so
nobly illustrious, that some day she can say of me: "No, there was no
wicked intention, and nothing small in his error."

In whatever situation we may hold to each other when you receive this
letter, permit me to thank you for the kind things you have said to me
about my false election and the "Médecin de campagne." Yes, if I ever
enter the tribune, and seize power, the thing you speak of would crown
my desires and be, in my political life, the object of my ambition. I
can say this without flattery, inasmuch as it was a fixed determination
before I ever knew you. I consider the primary cause a shame to France
of the eighteenth century as much as to that of the nineteenth.

I have much work to do, monsieur; and I am overwhelmed by it. I did
not expect this additional grief, for which I can only blame myself.
Express to Madame Hanska all my sorrow, and, though she may reject
them, I send her my respects, mingled with repentance and the assurance
of my obedience. But perhaps she has punished me already by one of
those forgettings from which there is no return, and will not even
remember what occasioned my error.

Adieu, monsieur; accept my sentiments and my regrets. DE BALZAC.

In case you are no longer in Vienna, I have notified M. Sina of the
parcel.



To MADAME HANSKA.

PARIS, October 18, 1834.

MADAME,--I went to spend a fortnight at Saché, in Touraine. After the
"Absolu" Dr. Nacquart thought me so debilitated that, not wishing (as
he said in his flattering way) that I should die on the last step of
the ladder, he ordered me my native air, and told me to write nothing,
read nothing, do nothing, and think nothing--if I could, he said,
laughing.

I went to Touraine, but I worked there. My mother came here and took
charge of my letters. On arriving this morning I found a heap of them,
but I sought for one only. I recognized the Vienna postmark and your
handwriting, which brought me, no doubt, a pardon that I accept without
any misplaced pride. Had I the wings and freedom of a bird you would
see me in Vienna before this letter, and I should have brought you the
most radiantly happy face in the world. But here I can only send you,
on the wings of the soul, a respectful effusion. In my joy I saw three
Vienna postmarks, just as Pitt, drunk, saw two orators in the tribune,
while Sheridan saw none at all.

I resume my correspondence according to the orders of your Beauty
(capital B, as for Highness, Grace, Holiness, Excellency, Majesty,
for Beauty is all that); but what can I tell you that is good? I am
gay in my distress, gay because my thoughts can fly, rainbow-hued and
fearless, to you; but I am, in reality, fatigued and overwhelmed with
work and obstacles. Do you really care much to know about this life
of a bloody crater? How can I send to you, so fresh, so pure, the
tale of so many sorrows? Do you know, can you know, what sufferings a
publisher can cause us by launching badly into the world a book which
has cost us a hundred nights, like "La Recherche de l'Absolu." Two
members of the Academy of Sciences taught me chemistry that the book
might be truly scientific. They made me correct my proofs for the
tenth or twelfth time. I had to read Berzelius, toil to be right as to
science, and toil to maintain style so as not to bore with chemistry
the cold French reader by making a book in which the interest is based
on chemistry,--in point of fact, there are not eight pages in all of
science in the four hundred pages of the book.

Well, these gigantic labours which, done within a given time, have worn
out twenty printers, who call me a "slayer of men," because when I sit
up ten nights they sit up five--well, these lion toils are compromised!
The "Absolu," ten times greater, in my opinion, than "Eugénie Grandet,"
will go without success, and my twelve volumes will not be exhausted
(as I am in making them); my freedom is delayed! Do you understand
my wrath? I hoped to finish "Séraphita" in Touraine; but I have worn
myself out, like Sisyphus, in useless efforts. It is not every day that
we can go to heaven.

I began in Touraine a great work,--"Le Père Goriot." You will see it
in the coming numbers of the "Revue de Paris." I put in _tiyeuilles_,
laughing like a maniac; but not in the mouth of a young woman, no; in
that of a horrible old one. I would not allow you to have a rival.

I come back here; I have my two last lawsuits to compound, my first
part of the "Études Philosophiques" to launch; happily Werdet is an
intelligent man and most devoted; but he has very little money. I must,
under pain of seeing him fail, do "César Birotteau" by December 15;
besides which, Madame Bêchet must have her fourth Part of the "Études
de Mœurs" by the 1st to the 15th of November.

My pecuniary obligations are coming due, and my payments are made with
difficulty. Besides which I have taken J. Sandeau to live with me; I
must furnish for him, and pilot him through the literary ocean, poor
shipwrecked fellow, full of heart. In short, one ought to be ten men,
have relays of brains, never sleep, be always blest with inspiration,
and refuse all distractions.

It is now three months since I last saw Madame de Berny; judge of my
life by that feature of it. Ah! if I were loved, my mistress might
sleep in peace; there is no place in my life---I won't say for an
infidelity, but--for a thought. It wouldn't be a merit; I am even
ashamed of myself. I should have to do six hundred leagues on foot, go
to Wierzchownia on a pilgrimage, to present myself in youthful shape,
for I am so fat that the newspapers joke me, the wretches! That is
France, _la belle France_; they laugh at ills produced by toil; they
laugh at my "abdomen." So be it! they have nothing else to say. They
cannot find in me either baseness or cowardice, or anything of what
dishonours them; and, as Philippon of "La Caricature" said to me: "Be
happy; _all who do not live by writing_ admire your character as much
as your works." I grasped his hand well that day. He gave me back my
strength.

You know by the announcement of the fourth Part, that I am busy with
the second volume of the "Scènes de la Vie privée," but what you did
not know of is "Le Père Goriot," a master work! the painting of a
sentiment so great that nothing can exhaust it, neither rebuffs, nor
wounds, nor injustice; a man who is _father_, as a saint, a martyr is
Christian. As for "César Birotteau," I have told you about him.

Yes, I inhaled a little of the autumn in Touraine; I played _plant_ and
_oyster_, and when the skies were clear I thought it was an omen, and
that a dove was coming from Vienna with a green leaflet in her beak.

I am now in my winter condition, in my study, with the Chartreuse
gown you know of, working for the future. As for my joys, they are
innocent,--the refurnishing of my bedroom, a cane that has made all
Paris gabble, a divine opera-glass which my chemists have had made for
me by the optician of the Observatoire; besides which, gold buttons
on my blue coat; buttons chiselled by fairy hands,--for the man who
carries, in the nineteenth century, a cane worthy of Louis XIV. cannot
keep upon his coat ignoble pinchbeck buttons. It is these little
innocent crotchets that make me pass for a millionaire. I have created
the sect of Canophilists in the fashionable world, and they take me for
a frivolous man. It is very amusing.

It is a month now since I have set foot at the Opera. I have, I
think, a box at the Bouffons. Is not that, you will say to me, very
comfortable poverty? But remember that music, chased gold canes,
buttons, and opera-glasses, are my sole amusements. No, you will not
blame them.

Shall I send you the corrected "Peau de Chagrin"? Yes. Ten days hence
that Baron Sina, who fills my mind on account of his name, will
receive, addressed to him, a package containing five 12mo volumes,
in the style of the four of "Le Médecin de campagne," which Maître
Werdet calls pretty little volumes. They are frightful; but this
edition is an edition intended to fix, definitively, the type of the
grand general edition of the work which, under the title of "Études
Sociales," will include all these fragments, shafts, columns, capitals,
bas-reliefs, walls, cupolas, in short, the building, which will be ugly
or beautiful, which will win me the _plaudite cives_ or the gemoniæ.
Be tranquil; in that day, when the illustrated edition comes, we shall
find asses on whose skin to print you a unique copy, enriched with
designs. That shall be the votive offering of the _pardoned one._ Well,
forget my fault, but I shall never forget it myself.

Do not fear, madame, that Zulma-Dudevant will ever see me attached to
her chariot.... I only speak of this because more celebrity is fastened
on that woman than she deserves; which is preparing for her a bad
autumn.

Madame de Berny does not like "Volupté;" she condemns the book as full
of rhetoric and empty of feeling. She was revolted by the passage where
the lover of Madame de Couaën goes into evil places, and thinks that
character ignoble. She has made me come down from my judgment; but
there are, nevertheless, fine pages, flowers in a desert.

"Jacques," Madame Sand's last novel, is advice given to husbands who
inconvenience their wives to kill themselves in order to leave them
free. The book is not dangerous. You could write ten times better if
you made a novel in letters. This one is empty and false from end to
end. An artless young girl leaves, after six months of marriage, a
_superior_ man for a popinjay; a man of importance, passionate and
loving, for a dandy, without any reason, physiological or moral. Then,
there is a love for mules, as in "Lélia" for unfruitful beings; which
is strange in a woman who is a mother, and who loves a good deal in
the German way, instinctively. All these authors roam the void, astride
of a hollow; there is no truth there. I prefer ogres, Tom Thumb, and
the Sleeping Beauty.

M. de G... has made a decent little failure. Those who have wounded me
never prosper; isn't that singular? Decidedly, fate wills that I shall
not see Madame de Castries. Each time that I rustle against her gown
some misfortune happens to me. The last time, I went to Lormois, the
residence of the Duc de Maillé, to see her, I came back on foot (to
get thin). Between Lonjumeau and Antony, a sharp point inside my boot
pushed up and wounded my foot. It was half-past eleven at night,--an
hour at which a road is not furrowed with vehicles. I was just about
to go to bed in a ditch, like a robber, when the cabriolet of one of
my friends came by, empty. The groom picked me up and took me home. I
believe in fate. It is in their harshness that we judge women. This one
showed me a dry heart. As Eugène Sue says, the viscera were tinder;
they would have stopped the blood instead of making it circulate.
Pardon me; this is the remains of the nail in my boot.

Fancy, I am going to give myself the pleasure of seeing myself acted.
I have imagined a buffoonery that I want to enjoy: "Prudhomme,
bigamist." Prudhomme is miserly; keeps his wife very short; she does
the household work and is a servant disguised by the title of wife.
She has never been to an Opera ball. Her neighbour wants to take her,
and being informed of the conjugal habits of Joseph Prudhomme, she
assists the wife in making a lay figure resembling Madame Prudhomme,
which the women put in the bed, and go off to the masked ball.
Prudhomme comes home, says his monologues, questions his wife, who is
asleep, and finally goes to bed. At five o'clock the wife returns; he
wakes, and finds himself with two wives. You can never imagine the
fun our actors will make of that sketch; but I swear to you that, if
it takes, Parisians will come and see it a hundred times. God grant
it! It will only cost me a morning, and may perhaps be worth fifteen
thousand francs. It is the best of buffoonery! But all depends on so
many things. Some one must lend me a name; the theatres are sinks
of vice, and my foot is virgin of stain. Perhaps the first and last
representation will be in this letter. Better one fine page not paid
for than a hundred thousand francs for a worthless farce. I have
never separated fame from poverty,--poverty with canes, buttons, and
opera-glasses, be it understood, and a fame easy to carry. That will be
my lot.

Have I hid my real griefs? have I chattered gaily enough? Would
you believe that I suffer,--that this morning I took up life with
difficulty, I rebelled against my solitude, I wanted to roam the world,
to see what the Landstrasse was, to put my fingers in the Danube, to
listen to the Viennese stupidities--in short, to do anything but write
pages; to be _living_ instead of turning pale over phrases?

I await, with impatience, till your white hand writes a few lines in
compensation of my toil; for to him who counts suffrages and estimates
them, yours are worth millions. I await, as Bugeaud said, "my peck;"
then I shall start off, joyous once more, on a new course across the
fields of thought. Who will unfasten my bridle and take off my bit;
who will give me my freedom; when shall I begin to write "Philippe le
Discret," to work at my ease--to-day, a scene; to-morrow, nothing,--and
date my work Wierzchownia?

Do you know what a _doublion_ is? It is the key of the fields,--it is
freedom! Come, come! another day, my sadness! to-day the moujik is all
gaiety at having kissed the hand of his lady, as in church they kiss
the golden pax the priest holds out. I am well of opinion of those who
love Musset; yes, he is a poet to put above Lamartine and V. Hugo; but
this is not yet the gospel.

I place on you the care of thanking M. Hanski for his last letter. But
I am sorry in my joy. I wish it had been any other cause than the dear
little Anna's illness that detained you in Vienna. Kiss her for me, on
the forehead, if that proud infant suffers it. And finally, remember me
to all about you.

You cannot have the bound "Séraphita" until New Year's day. I would
like to know if I may send Anna a little souvenir without fear of the
inquisitive nose and hands of the German custom-house.

Adieu; I have given you my hours of sleep so as not to rob Werdet, or
Madame Bêchet; a thousand respectful affections, and deign to accept my
profound obedience.


Sunday, 19th, three in the morning.

I have not slept; I had not read all my letters. My last two
difficulties are arrangeable. Two thorns less in my foot.

I have read over my scribblings. I am afraid you cannot read them; what
shall I do? Have I told you all? Oh! no. There are many things that are
never told.

My mother is very proud of the "Absolu;" my sister writes that she wept
with joy in reading it and in saying to herself that I was her brother.
Madame de Berny finds some spots upon it. She does not like that
Claës should turn out his daughter; she thinks that forced. Madame de
Castries writes me that she wept over it. I am sorry for the distance
between Paris and Vienna. I would have liked to have your opinion first.

Ah! I may go to England for a few days (in all, ten, to go and return).
My brother-in-law has just invented something wonderful, he says,
relating to railroads, which might be sold for a good little million to
the English. I shall try.

Did I speak to you of Prince Puckler-Muskau, and of my dinner with him
at the house of a species of German monster who calls herself the widow
of Benjamin Constant, but has all the air of being a good woman? Well,
if I did not speak of it it will be the subject of a conversation when
I am on the estates of your Beauteousness.

On my way to England I shall stop one week at Ham. The illustrious
Peyronnet has expected me there for six months, and the trip has always
been delayed. The Duc de Fitz-James writes to invite me to Normandy;
refused.

_Mon Dieu!_ forty letters read; it is a sort of drunkenness. Among
them are two unknown ladies. One modestly asks me to make her portrait
and write her life. She has green eyes and she is a widow--that's the
physical and the moral of her. The other sends me execrable verses. At
last I understand the _cachets_ of Voltaire. They were not vanity; they
were simply to avoid any but the letters of friends. This is what it
is to have--I, a poor devil--neither Ferney, nor two hundred thousand
francs income, nor one hundred francs for postage.

Sandeau will be lodged like a prince. He can't believe in his luck. I
embark him on a career of masterpieces by a thousand crowns of debt,
which we hypothecate on a bottle of ink. Poor lad! He does not know
what duty is. He is free. I chain him. I am sorry for it. He is at this
moment loved. A pretty young woman casts upon his wounds the balm of
her smiles.

Re-adieu.



PARIS. October 6, 1834.

I have been for the last few days so busy in settling Sandeau and
furnishing him with everything, for he is a child, that I have not
been able to write to you; and now I shall have to do so by fits and
starts, according to the order of my ideas and not that of logic.

Ah! in the first place, can you conceive that they are finding fault
with me for the name MARGUERITE in the "Recherche de l'Absolu." It is a
Flemish name, and that is all there is to say about it. I must be very
irreproachable when they have to find fault with me for that!

Next Saturday I give a dinner to the Tigers of my opera-box, and I am
preparing sumptuosities out of all reason. I shall have Rossini and
Olympe, his _cara donna_ [afterwards his wife], who will preside. Next
Nodier; then five _tigers_, Sandeau, and a certain Victor Bohain (a man
of great political talent, unjustly smirched), the most exquisite wines
of Europe, the rarest flowers, the best cheer; in short, I intend to
distinguish myself.

I don't know who told me that your bitter-sweet cousin expected me in
Geneva! _Mon Dieu!_ how queer! If I wanted to be gallant I should tell
you that I would not cross the Jura in winter for any one in the world
after having had the Maison Mirabaud [Mme. Hanska's house] for joy
during that stay in Geneva. Well, believe it.

I have worked much at "Père Goriot," which will be in the "Revue de
Paris" for November. My first part of the "Études Philosophiques,"
the pieces of which have been corrected with excessive severity, will
appear in a few days. I shall then busy myself with the "Mémoires d'une
jeune Mariée," a delightful composition, and with "César Birotteau,"
which is taking immense proportions. Also Emmanuel Arago and Sandeau
are going to do a great work in five acts, in which I have a third,--a
fine subject, which will pay Sandeau's debts and mine; a drama,
entitled "Les Courtisans." It will go first to the Porte-Saint-Martin;
but it will certainly get to the Français. It is magnificent! (I am a
little like Perrette and her jug of milk.) If we win the stage, and our
anonymous society, under the title of E. J. San-Drago (Sand-Arago),
is successful, I shall be free all the sooner, and Sandeau, trained
by me to keep house, will allow me to travel. It is impossible that a
man who destines himself to politics should not see Europe, not judge
fundamentally of manners, morals, and interests. The struggle between
France and other countries will always be decided by the North. I must
know the North at any cost, and, as M. de Margonne says, one has to be
young to travel. Therefore, my liberty! oh, how I long for it!

I shall go to Ham about November 5, and, perhaps, from there to
England; but I shall return for the 15th in Paris. My life is varied
only by ideas; physically, it is monotonous. I speak confidentially
with no one but Madame de Berny or with you. I find that one should
communicate but little with petty minds; one leaves one's wool
there, as on bushes. I am vowed to great sentiments, unique, lofty,
unalterable, exclusive, and it _is_ an odd contrast with my apparent
levity. I assure you it would take at least five or six years to
know to what point solitude has made me susceptible, and of how many
sacrifices I am capable without ostentation. What of sentiments,
feelings, I have made visible in my work is but the faint shadow of
the light that is in me. Up to the present time one woman only, Madame
de Berny, has really known what I am, because she has seen my smile,
always otherwise expressive, never cease.[1] In twelve years I have
had neither anger nor impatience. The heaven of my heart has always
been blue. Any other attitude is, to my thinking, impotence. Strength
should be a unit; and after having for seven years measured myself with
misfortune and vanquished it, and risen, to gain literary royalty,
every night with a will more determined than that of the night before,
I have, I think, the right to call myself strong. Thus inconstancy,
infidelity are _incomprehensibilities_ for me. Nothing wearies me;
neither waiting nor happiness. My friendship is of the race of the
granites; all will wear-out before the feeling I have conceived. Madame
de Berny is sixty years old; her griefs have changed and withered her.
My affection has redoubled. I say it without pride, because I see no
merit in it. It is my nature; which God has made oblivious of evil,
while ceaselessly in presence of the good. A being who loves me always
makes me quiver. Noble sentiments are so fruitful; why should we go in
search of bad ones? God made me to smell the fragrance of flowers, not
the fetor of mud. And why too, should I entangle myself in meannesses?
All within me tends toward what is great. I choke in the plains, I live
on the mountains! And then, I have undertaken so much! We have reached
the _era of intelligence_. Material monarchs, brutal forces are passing
away. There are worlds intellectual, in which Pizarro, Cortez, Columbus
must appear. There will be sovereigns in the kingdom of thought. With
this ambition no baseness, no pettiness is possible. Nothing wastes
time like petty things; and so, I need something very great to fill my
mind outside of this circle where I find the infinite. There is but one
thing--to the infinite, the infinite--an immense love. If I have it,
should I go in search of a Parisian woman, a Madame de ----? (Some one
told me yesterday that she wished a scandal; that her husband left her
free, but her vanity is such--I believe it--that she wants to be talked
about.) I have such a horror of the women of Paris that I camp upon my
work from six in the morning till six at night. At half-past six my
hired coupé comes for me, and takes me one day to the Opera, another to
the Italians, and I go to bed at midnight. Thus I have not a minute to
give to any one. I receive visitors while I dine; I talk of our plans
for the plays during dinner. I correspond with no one but you, Madame
de Berny, my sister, and my mother. All other letters wait till Sunday,
when I open them, and all that are not on business are handed over to
Sandeau, who offers me his hand as secretary.

So doing, I shall end by extinguishing this fire of debt and
accomplishing my promised work. Without it, no salvation, no liberty.
The deuce! you will get the proof of what I now have the pleasure of
writing to you, and of my firmness, when you see my books; for a man
can't coquet and amuse himself, and bring out such publications. Toil
and the Muse; that means that the toiling Muse is virtuous,--she is a
virgin. It is deplorable that in this nineteenth century we are obliged
to go to the images of Greek mythology; but I have never been so struck
as I am now by the powerful truth of those myths.

Do not think that what I have been writing is a round-about way of
telling you that, whatever be your age and face, my affection for you
would be the same. I should not take circuitous ways to tell you a
thing it would give me pleasure to express if I did not think you had
enough perspicacity to have felt it, divined it. No; I was examining
myself in good faith without any intention of showing myself off. I
wish to be so great by intellect and fame that you can feel proud of my
true friendship. Each of my works, which I want to make more and more
extended, better thought, better written, will be a flattery for you,
a flower, a bouquet that I shall send you! Distance alone admits of
flowers of rhetoric.

My brother-in-law has just discovered a process which, in his opinion,
solves on railways the problem of inclined planes, and will save
great costs in construction and traction. It is possible to sell this
invention to the English; here he has taken out a patent, and the
English purchaser can take out an export patent. My brother-in-law does
not want to go to London, and I am going to attempt this affair in the
interests of my sister. That is the history of my journey to London.

We are not satisfied with our brother in Normandy. His wife is
pregnant. He has complicated, still further, the difficulties of his
life, poor creature. My mother is not well; I wish I could see her in
good health to enjoy what I am preparing for her. But, good God! she
has had many trials. To-day she turns to me, and heartily; she seems
to recognize, without admitting it, the great wrong of her slight
affection for my sister and me; she is punished in the child of her
choice in a dreadful way. Henry is nothing, and will be nothing. He has
spoiled the future his brother-in-law or I might have made for him by
his marriage. All this is horribly sad.

Yesterday I re-read your letters. As I was putting them away, pressing
them together to arrange them better, they exhaled a fragrance, I know
not what, of grandeur and distinction that could not be mistaken. Those
who talk of your forehead are not in error. But what is surprising in
your letters is a turn of phrase, all your own, which issues from your
heart as your glance from your eyes; it is our language written as
Fénelon wrote it. You must have read Fénelon a great deal, or else you
have in your soul his harmonious thought. When these letters come I
read them first like a man in a hurry to talk with you; I do not really
taste them till the second reading, which happens capriciously. When
some thought saddens me I have recourse to you. I bring out the little
box in which is my elixir, and I live again in your Italian journey. I
see Diodati; I stretch myself on that good sofa of the Maison Mirabaud
I turn the leaves of the "Gotha," that pretty "Gotha;" and then, after
an hour or two, all is serene. I find something cool within me. My soul
has rested on a friendly soul. No one is in my secret. It is something
like the prayer of the mystic, from which he rises radiant. Will you
think me very poetic? But it is true.

My Sandeau has brought out a book which is already sold. It is "Madame
de Sommerville." Read it, this first book of a young man. Hold out
your hand to him; do not be severe. Keep your severities for me; they
are my privilege. Madame de Berny pays me no more compliments. From
her, criticisms. Criticisms are sweet when made by a friendly hand; we
believe them; they sadden because they are, no doubt, true, but they do
not rend.

Well, adieu. You ought to be reading my last letter at the moment I am
writing this. If you wrote to me so that I should receive your letters
on Sundays, I would answer on Mondays. We should gain by not crossing
each other.

I shall send, without letter of advice, to Sina's address, the first
part of the "Études Philosophiques." You know all that; but let me
believe that you take an interest in these enormous corrections _à la_
Buffon (he corrected immensely), which ought to make my work, when
completed ("Études Sociales," about which I told you), a monument in
our fine language.[2] I believe that in 1838 the three parts of this
gigantic work will be, if not wholly finished, at least built up, so
that a judgment can be formed of the mass.

The "Études de Mœurs" will represent all social effects, without a
single situation in life, physiognomy, character of man or woman,
manner of living, profession, social zone, French region, or anything
whatever of childhood, maturity, old age, politics, justice, or war,
having been forgotten.

That done, the history of the human heart traced thread by thread, the
social history given in all its parts, there is _the base_. The facts
will not be imaginary; they will be what is happening everywhere.

Then, the second structure is the "Études Philosophiques;" for
after the _effects_ will come the _causes_. I shall have painted
in the "Études de Mœurs" sentiments and their action, life and
its deportment. In the "Études Philosophiques" I shall tell _why_
the sentiments, _on what_ the life; what is the line, what are
the conditions beyond which neither society nor man exist; and,
after having surveyed society in order to describe it, I shall
survey it again in order to judge it. So, in the "Études de Mœurs"
_individualities_ are typified; in the "Études Philosophiques" _types_
are individualized. Thus I shall have given life everywhere: to the
type by individualizing it, to the individual by typifying him. I shall
have given thought to the fragment; I shall have given to thought the
life of the individual.

Then, after _effects_ and _causes_, will come the "Études Analytiques,"
of which the "Physiologie du Mariage" is a part; for after _effects_
and _causes_ we must search for _principles. Manners_ and _morals
[mœurs]_ are the play; _causes_ are the _coulisses_ and the
_machinery. Principles_ are the _maker_. But in proportion as the work
winds spirally up to the heights of thought, it draws itself in and
condenses. Though twenty-four volumes are required for the "Études de
Mœurs," only fifteen are needed for the "Études Philosophiques," and
only nine for the "Études Analytiques." Thus man, society, humanity
will be described, judged, analyzed, without repetitions, and in a work
which will be like an "Arabian Nights" of the West.

When all is done, my Madeleine scraped, my pediment carved, my last
touches given, I shall have been _right_, or I shall have been _wrong_.
But, after having made the poesy, the demonstration of a whole system,
I shall make the science of it in an Essay on Human Forces ["Essai
sur les Forces Humaines"]. And, on the cellar-walls of this palace I,
child and jester, shall have drawn the immense arabesque of the "Contes
Drolatiques."

Do you think, madame, that I have much time to lose at the feet of a
Parisian woman? No; I had to choose. Well, I have now shown you my
real mistress; I have removed her veils. There is the work, there
is the gulf, there is the crater, there is the matter, there is the
woman, there is she who takes my nights, my days, who puts a price on
this very letter, taken from hours of study--but taken with delight.
Ah! I entreat you, never attribute to me anything petty, low, or
mean,--_you_, who are able to measure the spread of my wings!

Well, re-adieu. Recall the carver, the founder, the sculptor, the
goldsmith, the galley-slave, the artist, the thinker, the poet,
the--_whatever you will_, to the memory of those about you who love
him, and think of the power of a lonely affection, that of a palm-tree
in the desert, a palm-tree that rises to the skies for refreshment,
if you would know the part that you have in it. Some day, when I have
finished all, we will laugh heartily over it. To-day one must work!

[Footnote 1: Probably misprinted in the French; but I leave it verbatim
as it is given.--TR.]

[Footnote 2: He changed the title to "La Comédie Humaine," which is
indeed a monument, and his monument.--TR.]



PARIS, November 22--December 1, 1834.

_Mon Dieu!_ I have to bear the burden of my own giddiness. I have not
been to London; my brother-in-law changed his mind. You think me in
England and you have not written. I am here without knowing what has
become of you, or what you are doing. A thousand anxieties have seized
me the last few days. Are you ill? Is M. Hanski ill? Is Anna? In
short, I am making dragons for myself about you. I expected a letter,
and the letter not coming I began to search out _why_. The why is your
belief in my departure.

I have no good things to tell you. I am mortally sad. In spite of the
consolations of work and the forced activities of poverty, there is
a void in my life that weighs upon me. In moments of depression I am
solitary. Madame de Berny still suffers cruelly, and she remains in the
country. I have been to see her for a few days. Those few days are all
I have been able to give her for five months. You can judge by that
what my life has been,--a desert to cross. Shall I reach the happy land
where streams and verdure and the gazelles are?

My poor mother is extremely ill. I expect her here to-morrow;
consultations as to her health are necessary. My brother's household
is more and more disheartening, and toward the close of every year
business affairs are generally difficult. You see that all conspires to
sadden me.

We have, Sandeau and I, begun a great comedy: "La Grande Mademoiselle,"
history of Lauzun, his marriage, and, for culmination, "Marie, pull off
my boots." But with a subject of this kind we may fail before a public
blasé with horrors. Whatever is merely witty seems pale. However!

I was writing this when your letter came, and I will answer it point
by point. You know my character very little if you think that I ever
abandon a sentiment, or an idea, or a friend. No, no, madame; it takes
many wounds, many blows of the axe to cut down what is in my heart.
Borget is in Italy; Borget is roving, painting, and does not write to
me. I have had news of him only indirectly; nevertheless, he is always
fresh in my thoughts, though we have known each other for several
years.

I am not _infatuated_ about Sandeau; but I held out a pole to a poor
swimmer who was going under. Where you are right is in believing firmly
that I will let no one penetrate to the depths of my heart. For that,
the "Open, Sesame" that you have uttered is necessary. Few persons
know those sacramental words. I should be the most unhappy man in the
world if the secrets of my soul were known. Conjectures, however, are
not lacking. But I have too great a powder of jesting to allow of
anything I wish to hide becoming known. In France, we are obliged to
veil depths by levity; without it we should be ruined here.

Your letter re-animates me a little, much, extremely. You have put a
balm into my heart, like the Fosseuse. I will send you, immediately,
the five volumes of the "Études Philosophiques," my "Lettre à la
littérature," and "Le Père Goriot" in manuscript; together with the two
numbers of the "Revue de Paris" in which it will appear.

"César Birotteau" is getting on, and the "Mémoires d'une jeune Mariée"
are on the ways. I work now twenty hours daily. Luxury will never
prevent me from realizing my project of solitude at Wierzchownia, for I
see plainly, on one hand, the impossibility of being here in presence
of the literary discussions about me which are beginning to arise
violently, and the need of preparing, far from pin-pricks, two great
bludgeon blows,--the tragedy of "Philippe II." and "L'Histoire de la
succession du Marquis de Carabas," in which the political question will
be plainly decided in favour of the power of absolute monarchy. But
without this reason I should still have the keenest desire for travel;
and even without this cause, again, there is a greater reason than all
others, which would make me surmount every obstacle. Do you know it?
Will you have it? Do you care for it? Well, I know nothing sweeter,
more endearing, grander, more delightful than your friendship. To go in
search of it, to enjoy it for eight days, one could well travel eight
hundred leagues and not mind the labour of the journey.

No, no, the _tigers_ will not pervert me. Alas! they are too stupid. I
am compromised. I must give up my box on account of that neighbourhood.
It is a stable of tigers!

I saw at the Opera, in a box near mine, Delphine P..., poor thing!
withered, changed, faded, mistress of M. de F... _Mon Dieu!_ what a
skeleton! What a wearied and wearying air! with a species of dead-leaf
skin! No, that woman is not a woman! She looks like a corpse about to
fall into putrefaction. On the other hand, behind our box is that of
the Comtesse Comar, or Komar, or Komarck, for it was Zaluski who told
me the name, and I don't know the spelling of it; never did I see a
more amiable, more seductive old woman. She is Madame Jeroslas ... plus
heart and frankness. She had two pretty creatures with her. Zaluski is
to present me. You don't know how I like to be with persons of your
country. A name in _ka_ or _ki_ goes to my heart.

Oh! if you are kind, _if you love me_ (I wish I could say that
gracefully and irresistibly, as you say it), you will never leave
me fifteen days without a letter. Whether you be in Vienna or at
Wierzchownia, you do not know how sweet a true friendship is to the
heart of a poor toiler who lives in the midst of Paris like a labourer
in the Swedish mines. I have cut loose from everything. I have no duty
to fulfil to society. I have a horror of false friends and grimaces. I
am alone, like a rock in mid-ocean. My perpetual labour is not to the
taste of any one. My poor sister Laure is angry at not seeing me. I
want to triumph over the remainder of the distresses that envelop me;
and I have not been strong, constant, and courageous for five years to
fail in the sixth.

Should I get a month to myself at the beginning of the year, you will
not be displeased if I bring my New Year's gifts to the pretty little
Anna myself, inasmuch as the Custom-house is so malicious? I shall
have the pleasure of going five hundred leagues to dine with you. But
so much work must be done to attain this result that I only speak of
it as one of those impossibilities that spur me to work and redouble
my courage; something results from it. The "Recherche de l'Absolu" was
only written through a hope of this kind. The compromise with Gosselin
took the profits of that arduous labour. Oh! you do not know me. In
your letters there are complaints, doubts, and polite accusations that
dishearten me.

"Le Père Goriot" is a fine work, but monstrously sad. To make it
complete, it was necessary to show the _moral sink-hole_ of Paris; and
it has the effect of a disgusting sore.


Wednesday, 26.

I must tell you that yesterday (my letter has been interrupted) I
copied out your portrait of Mademoiselle Céleste, and I said to two
uncompromising judges: "Here is a sketch I have just flung on paper. I
wanted to paint a woman under given circumstances, and launch her into
life through such and such an event."

What do you think they said?--"Read that portrait again." After which
they said:--

"That is your masterpiece. You have never before had that
_laisser-aller_ of a writer which shows the hidden strength."

"Ha, ha!" I answered, striking my head; "that comes from the forehead
of _an analyst_."

I kneel at your feet for this violation; but I left out all that
was personal. Beat me, scold me, but I could not refuse myself the
enjoyment of this praise; and I tasted the greatest of pleasures,--that
of secretly hearing a person praised who is unknown and to whom one
bears a deep affection. It is enjoyment twice over.

I am convinced of the immense superiority of your mind, and I am
confounded to find in you such feminine graces, together with the force
of mind which Madame Dudevant has and Madame de Staël once had; and I
say this very loud, that you may not make yourself small behind that
tall steeple you have so often boasted of to me. The opinion that I
express upon you is a matured opinion. I am here, far from the prestige
of your presence. I go over in my mind, impartially, your sayings, your
opinions, your studies, and I write you these lines with a sort of joy,
because Madame Carraud and Madame de Berny have made other women seem
very small to me; and because, in the matter of grace, amenity, and the
science hidden under the frivolity of smiles, I am a great connoisseur,
having lovingly inhaled those flowers of womanhood, and what I say of
you is conscientious and true. Besides, you are too _grande dame_ to be
proud of it. What you should be proud of is your kindness, and those
qualities which are acquired only by the practice of Christian virtues,
at which I never jest now.

Forgive me the disconnectedness of my letters, the incompleteness of my
sentences. I write to you at night before I begin to work. My letters
are like a prayer made to a good genius.

Go to the Prater with M. Hanski! _Mon Dieu!_ you trample the world
underfoot, and you do not set in the light that which is good!

Ah! I must tell you that literature, seeing my cane, my chiselled
buttons, has decided that I am the Benjamin of an old English woman,
Lady Anelsy (I write the name badly), whom I met at Madame d'Abrantès,
and who has a box at the Opera, near mine (she separates me from
Madame Delphine P...), and to whom I bow. I have answered friends
(friends who are tigers in the guise of doves) that, not being able
to bear the features of the old lady in my heart, I have had them
carved on the knob of my cane. You have no idea what a fuss my movable
property creates. I have much more success through that than through my
works. That is Paris!

My dinner? Why, it made an excitement. Rossini declared he had never
seen, eaten, or drunk anything better among sovereigns. It sparkled
with wit. The beautiful Olympe was graceful, sensible, and perfect.
Lautour-Mézeray was the wittiest of men; he extinguished the cross-fire
of Rossini, Nodier, and Malitourne by an amazing artillery vigour. The
master of the feast was the humble lighter who put the match to each
sun in this array of fireworks. _Ecco._

I told you that "La Recherche de l'Absolu" would astonish you; well,
you will be as little prepared for "Père Goriot." After that will come
the glorious end of "Séraphita." Never will imagination have been in so
many different spheres. I do not speak of the perfumer Birotteau, or of
the "Mémoires d'une jeune Mariée;" those will be supporting the battle
with fresh troops.

Do you know for whom is this success? Well, I want you to hear my name
gloriously, respectfully pronounced. I want to give you the sweetest
enjoyments of friendship; I want to have you say to yourself: "He
laughed like a boy at Geneva, and he made campaigns into China!" For
you think he is a moralist, a toiler, a cynic, a--I don't know what.
But he _is_ a child who loves pebbles, and talks nonsense, and does it;
who reads "Gotha," plays patience, and makes M. Hanski laugh.

Geneva is to me like a memory of childhood. There I quitted my chain;
there I laughed without saying to myself, "To-morrow!" I shall always
remember having tried to dance a galop down the long salon at Diodati,
where Byron got drunk. And the country about la Bellotte! I must not
think too much about all that; I should go to Vienna! I have such
superstition, such veneration for persons with whom I can be _myself_.
How has that come about among us? I don't know, but so it is. I can
talk of my griefs, my joys, before you and Monsieur Hanski; here I
am myself only with my sister and Madame de Berny,--probably because
you resemble the latter, and are very much my sister. At this moment
I would fain tell you, honourably, all graceful and sweet things,
and send you, gathered one by one in the fields of friendship, the
prettiest flowers,--those you like best; for I wish never again to lie
for one moment under your displeasure.

If you ordain it, Lucullus will retreat into the skin of Diogenes in
order not again to read these words: "Your goings-on as Lucullus will
retard your freedom."

I dine to-day with one of those who _took_ Algiers, the
commissary-general Denniée, who for the last three years is in love
with an admired creature (rather a fool), Mademoiselle Amigo, of the
Italian Opera. There, came Rossini, in dishabille and not sarcastic.
Yesterday, at the first representation of "Erani," Olympe said to me,
motioning to Rossini:--

"You cannot imagine how beautiful and sublime the soul of that being
is; how kind he is, and to what point he is kind. To reserve his heart
and its treasures for her he loves, he wraps himself in sarcasm to the
eyes of others; he makes himself prickly."

I took Rossini's hand and pressed it joyfully.

_Mio maestro_," I said to him; "then we can understand each other."

"What, you too!" he said, smiling.

I lowered my head; then I showed him all that brilliant Paris which was
present, and said:--

"To cast one's diamonds and pearls into that mud--"

And at that moment my eyes fell upon "Delmar's" box.


Monday, December 1.

My letter has remained for eight days on, in, and underneath "Le Père
Goriot." I have had a thousand money worries, but I am getting out of
them. Never have I been so powerful to get through this business by my
firm will. Another few months, and I am saved.

Within a few days a little joy has come to me. After much pressing,
and receiving no for an answer for the last three years, they have
consented to sell me "La Grenadière." So I shall have a retreat for
study, and the furniture, books, and arrangements I should make will
remain mine. I could live there six months, incognito, without seeing
any one. So here I am, very happy--so far as a material thing can give
happiness.

You have been proud of "Père Goriot." My friends declare that it is
comparable to nothing, and is above all my other compositions.

Do you know that I am uneasy on what your last letter said relating to
depth of heart, to which no man could ever attain. Those few words make
me think you do not know me well, and it grieves me, because you cannot
love me as well as I might be loved if I were known better. _Mon Dieu!_
I am the object of a thousand calumnies, each more ignoble than the
others, and I pay no more attention to them than he who is above the
Jura listens to Pictet. Is that a merit? But a word from you puts alarm
into my brain, into my heart.

Well, adieu. It is now eight days that I have been conversing with
you. I will write a little more regularly in future. The doctors have
obtained that I shall change my way of life. I am going to bed at
midnight to rise at six in the morning, and work from then till three
in the afternoon. I shall have from three to five for my pleasures, and
I will write you each day a little line. After which I am ordered to go
and amuse myself for six hours till midnight.

_Mon Dieu!_ I have the same difficulty in quitting my pen that I had in
quitting the Maison Mirabaud when the master forced me to go by going
to bed himself. A thousand prettinesses to Anna, my friendly regards to
M. Hanski, if you don't keep them all for yourself.



PARIS, December 15, 1834.

Oh! how long it is since I have seen your writing! Have I fallen again
into disgrace? Are you displeased with my long letters written at
intervals? I can only give you--offer you a day here and there; it is
a day of respite in the midst of my long combat. It is the moment when
I, poor dove without a branch, rest my feet beside the living spring,
the source where she dips her thirsty beak into the pure waters of
affection.

Yes, all is enlarging--the circus and the athlete. To face all, I must
imitate the French soldier during the first campaigns in Italy: never
recoil before impossibilities, and find in victory the courage to beat
back the morrow's enemy.

Last week I took in all but ten hours' sleep. So that yesterday and
to-day I have been like a poor foundered horse on his side,--in my
bed, not able to do anything, or hear anything. The fact is, the
first number of "Père Goriot" made eighty-three pages in the "Revue
de Paris," equivalent to half an octavo volume. I had to correct the
proofs of those eighty-three pages three times in six days. If it is
any glory, I alone could make that tremendous effort. But none the less
must my other works be carried on.

Forgive me, therefore, the irregularity of my correspondence. To-day
one flood, to-morrow another flood sweeps me along. I bruise myself
against one rock, I recover, and am thrown upon a reef. These are
struggles that no one can appreciate. No one knows what it is to change
ink into gold!

I have begun to tremble. I am afraid that fatigue, lassitude, impotence
may overtake me before I have erected my building. I need, from time to
time, good little words said out of France, some great distractions,
and the greatest come from the heart, do they not?

However, "Père Goriot" is an unheard-of success; there is but one
voice: "Eugénie Grandet," the "Absolu," are surpassed. I am, so far, at
the first number only, and the second is beyond that. _Tiyeuilles_ has
made people laugh. I return you that success.

But you, what has become of you? No letters! nothing! A few days
more, and I hope my work will be rewarded by reaching your ear like
a reproach. I did believe you would periodically cast me a smile,
a letter, a gracious dew of words written to refresh the brow, the
heart, the soul, the will of your moujik. Which of us can dispose of
our time? You. Who writes oftenest? I. I have most affection, that is
natural; you are the most lovable, and I have more reasons to bear you
friendship than you have to grant it to me. There is but one thing
that pleads for me; misfortune, misery, toil; and as you have all the
compassions of woman and of angel, you should think of me a little
oftener than you do. In that, I am right. Write to me every week, and
do not be vexed with me if I can only answer you twice a month. This
torrential life is my excuse. Once I am freed, and you shall judge of
me. Yes, forgive much to him who loves and toils much. Reckon to me
as something nights without sleep, days without pleasures, without
distractions. Madame Mitgislas ... invited me, but I did not accept; I
have neither the time nor the wish to do so. Society gives so little
and wants so much! and I am so ill at ease in it! I am so embarrassed
on receiving silly compliments, and _true sounds_ of the heart are so
rare!

Since I wrote to you there has been nothing but work in my life,
slashed with a few little good debauches of music. We have had "Moïse"
and "Semiramide" mounted and executed as those operas have never
been before, and every time that either is given I go. It is my only
pleasure. I do not meddle in politics. I say, like some grammarian,
I don't know who, "Whatever happens, I have six thousand verbs
conjugated." I bring daily, like an ant, a chip to my pile. There
are days when the memory of the Île Saint-Pierre gives me frenzies;
I thirst for a journey, I writhe in my chains. Then, the next day, I
think that I have fifty ducats to pay at the end of the month, and I
set to work again!

Will you like me with long hair? Everybody here says I look ridiculous.
I persist. My hair has not been cut since my sweet Geneva. In order
that you may know what I mean by "my sweet Geneva," you ought to see
Chariot's caricature on "my sweet Falaise": a conscript on Mount Blanc,
not seeing an apple-tree, calls it "Land of evil!"

At this moment I am working at two things: "La Fleur du Poix," and
"Melmoth réconcilié." Then I have also to do the counterpart of "Louis
Lambert," "Ecce Homo," and the end of the "Enfant Maudit," besides that
of "Séraphita" (which belongs to you), and that of "Le Père Goriot,"
which will end the year 1834, just as the end of "Séraphita" began it.

You understand that all my time is fully employed, nights and days;
for, besides these things, I have proofs of my reprints which are
always going on. Sandeau is horrified. He says that fame can never pay
for such toil, and that he would rather die than undertake it. He has
no other feeling for me than the pity we give to sick people.

I shall see you, no doubt, in Vienna. I have very solidly determined
within myself to go there in March, so as to be able to make a
reconnoissance of the battlefields of Wagram and Essling. I shall start
after the carnival.

Did I tell you that I am to have the Grenadière?

_Mon Dieu!_ I return to your silence; you do not know how uneasy I am
about you, your little one, and M. Hanski. It would not cost you much
just to say: "We are all well, and we think of you."

Well, I must say adieu, send you a thousand gracious thoughts, and beg
you to offer my respects to M. Hanski, keeping my homage at your feet.
