THE WAR (1914-1916).

_To Howard Sturgis._


/*
Lamb House, Rye.
[August 4th, 1914.]
*/

/*
Dearly beloved Howard!
*/

I think one of the reasons is that I have so allowed silence and
separation to _accumulate_--the effort of breaking through the mass
becomes in that case so formidable; the mass being thus the monstrous
mountain that blocks up the fair scene and that one has to explain away.
I am engaged in that effort at the present moment, however--I _am_
breaking through the mass, boring through the mountain, I feel, as I put
pen to paper--and this, too, though I don't, though I shan't, though I
can't particularly "explain." And why _should_ I treat you at this time
of day--or, to speak literally, of night--as if you had begun suddenly
not to be able to understand without a vulgar demonstration on the
blackboard? As I should never dream of resorting to that mode of public
proof that I tenderly and unabatedly love you, so why should I think it
necessary to chalk it up there that there was, all those strange weeks
and months during which I made you no sign, an absolute _inevitability_
in the graceless appearance? I call them strange because of the
unnatural face that they wear to me now--but they had at the time the
deadliest familiar look; the look of all the other parts of life that
one was giving up and doing without--even if it didn't resemble them in
their comparative dismissability. From them I learned perforce at last
to avert my head, whereas there wasn't a moment of the long stretch
during which I never either wrote or wired you for generous leave to
come down to tea or dinner or both, there wasn't a moment when I hadn't,
from Chelsea to Windsor, my eyes fondly fixed on you. You seemed rather
to go out of their reach when I was placed in some pretended assurance
that you had left Qu'acre for Scotland, but now that I hear, by some
equally vague voice of the air, that you are still at home--and this
appears more confirmed to me--I have you intensely before me again; yes,
and so vividly that I even make you out as sometimes looking at _me_. I
think in fact it's a good deal the magnanimous sadness I so catch from
you that makes me feel to-night how little longer I can bear my own
black air of having fallen away while I yet really and intensely stick,
and therefore get on the way to you again, so far as this will take me.

It will soon be three weeks since I came back here from Chelsea--which I
was capable of leaving, yes, without having made you a sign. It was a
case, dearest Howard, of the essential inevitability--the mark you
yourself must in these days so recognise in all your omissions and
frustrations, all your lapses from the mortal act. Even you must have to
know them so on your own part--and you must feel them just to _have_ to
be as they are (and as you are.) That was the way the like things had to
be with me--as _I_ was; and it's to insult our long and perfect
understanding not to feel that you have treasures of the truest
interpretation of everything whatever in our common condition. Oh how I
so want at last, all the same, to have a direct word or two from your
blest self on your own share of that community! I have questioned
whomsoever I could in any faint degree suppose worth questioning on this
score of the _show_ you are making--but of course, I admit, elicited no
word of any real value. Five words of your own articulation--by which I
mean scratches of your own pen--will go further with me than any amount
of roundabout twaddle. I hear of predatory loose women quartered upon
you again--and I groan in my far-off pain; especially when I reflect
that _their_ fatuous account would be that you were in health and joy
quite exactly by reason of them. I think the great public blackness most
of all makes me send out this signal to you--as if I were lighting the
twinkle of a taper to set over against you in my window.

_August 5th._ The taper went out last night, and I am afraid I now
kindle it again to a very feeble ray--for it's vain to try to talk as if
one weren't living in a nightmare of the deepest dye. How can what is
going on not be to one as a huge horror of blackness? Of course that is
what it is to you, dearest Howard, even as it is to your infinitely
sickened inditer of these lines. The plunge of civilization into this
abyss of blood and darkness by the wanton feat of those two infamous
autocrats is a thing that so gives away the whole long age during which
we have supposed the world to be, with whatever abatement, gradually
bettering, that to have to take it all now for what the treacherous
years were all the while really making for and _meaning_ is too tragic
for any words. But one's reflections don't really bear being uttered--at
least we each make them enough for our individual selves and I didn't
mean to smother you under mine in addition to your own....

But good-night again--my lamp now is snuffed out. Have I mentioned to
you that I am not here alone?--having with me my niece Peggy and her
younger brother--both "caught" for the time, in a manner; though
willing, even glad, as well as able, to bear their poor old appalled
Uncle the kindest company--very much the same sort as William bears you.
I embrace you, and him too, and am ever your faithfullest old

/*
_H. J._
*/




_To Henry James, junior._


_Dictated._

/*
Lamb House, Rye.
August 6th, 1914.
*/

/*
Dearest Harry,
*/

...Everything is of the last abnormalism now, and no convulsion, no
historic event of any such immensity can ever have taken place in such a
turn-over of a few hours and with such a measureless rush--the whole
thing being, in other words, such an unprecedented combination of size
and suddenness. There has never surely, since the world began, been any
suddenness so big, so instantly mobilised, any more than there has been
an equal enormity so sudden (if, after all, that _can_ be called sudden,
or more than comparatively so, which, it is now clearly visible, had
been brewing in the councils of the two awful Kaisers from a good while
back.) The entrance of this country into the fray has been supremely
inevitable--never doubt for an instant of that; up to a few short days
ago she was still multiplying herself over Europe, in the magnificent
energy and pertinacity of Edward Grey, for peace, and nothing but peace,
in any way in which he could by any effort or any service help to
preserve it; and has now only been beaten by what one can only call the
huge immorality, the deep conspiracy for violence, for violence and
wrong, of the Austrian and the German Emperors. Till the solemnly
guaranteed neutrality of Belgium was three or four days ago deliberately
violated by Germany, in defiance of every right, in her ferocious push
to get at France by that least fortified way, we still hung in the
balance here; but with that no "balance" was any longer possible, and
the impulse to participate to the utmost in resistance and redress
became as unanimous and as sweeping a thing in the House of Commons and
throughout the land as it is possible to conceive. That is the one
light, as one may call it, in so much sickening blackness--that in an
hour, here, all breaches instantly healed, all divisions dropped, the
Irish dissension, on which Germany had so clearly counted, dried up in a
night--so that there is at once the most striking and interesting
spectacle of united purpose. For myself, I draw a long breath that we
are not to have failed France or shirked any shadow of a single one of
the _implications_ of the Entente; for the reason that we go in only
under the last compulsion, and with cleaner hands than we have ever had,
I think, in any such matter since such matters were. (You see how I talk
of "we" and "our"--which is so absolutely instinctive and irresistible
with me that I should feel quite abject if I didn't!) However I don't
want, for today, to disquisitionise on this great public trouble, but
only to give you our personal news in the midst of it--for it's
astonishing in how few days we have jumped into the sense of _being_ in
the midst of it. England and the Continent are at the present hour full
of hung-up and stranded Americans--those unable to get home and waiting
for some re-establishment of violently interrupted traffic.... But
good-bye, dearest Harry, now. It's a great blessing to be able to write
you under this aid to lucidity--it's in fact everything, so I shall keep
at it. I hope the American receipt of news is getting organised on the
strong and sound lines it should be. Send this, of course, please, as
soon as you can to your Mother and believe me your devotedest old Uncle,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Mrs. Alfred Sutro._


/*
Lamb House, Rye.
August 8th, 1914.
*/

/*
Dear Mrs. Sutro,
*/

I have your good letter, but how impossible it seems to speak of
anything _before_ one speaks of the tremendous public matter--and then
how impossible to speak of anything _after_! But here goes for poor dear
old George Sand and her ancient prattle (heaven forgive me!) to the
extent that of course that autobiography (it _is_ a nice old set!) does
in a manner notify one that it's going to be frank and copious,
veracious and vivid, only during all its earlier part and in respect to
the non-intimate things of the later prime of its author, and to stand
off as soon as her personal plot began to thicken. You see it was a book
written in middle life, not in old age, and the "thick" things, the
thickest, of her remarkable past were still then very close behind her.
But as an autobiography of the beginnings and earlier maturities of life
it's indeed finer and jollier than anything there is.

Yes, how your loss, for the present, of Nohant is swept away on the
awful tide of the Great Interruption! This last is as mild a name for
the hideous matter as one can consent to give--and I confess I live
under the blackness of it as under a funeral pall of our murdered
civilization. I say "for the present" about Nohant, and you, being young
and buoyant, will doubtless pick up lost opportunities in some
incalculable future; but that time looks to me as the past already
looks--I mean the recent past of happy motor-runs, on May and June
afternoons, down to the St. Alban's and the Witleys: disconnected and
fabulous, fatuous, fantastic, belonging to another life and another
planet. I find it such a mistake on my own part to have lived on--when,
like other saner and safer persons, I might perfectly have not--into
this unspeakable give-away of the whole fool's paradise of our past. It
throws back so livid a light--_this_ was what we were so fondly working
for! My aged nerves can scarcely stand it, and I bear up but as I can. I
dip my nose, or try to, into the inkpot as often as I can; but it's as
if there were no ink there, and I take it out smelling gunpowder,
smelling blood, as hard as it did before. And yet I keep at it--or mean
to; for (tell Alfred for his own encouragement--and pretty a one as I am
to encourage!) that I hold we can still, he and I, _make_ a little
civilization, the inkpot aiding, even when vast chunks of it, around us,
go down into the abyss--and that the preservation of it depends upon our
going on making it in spite of everything and sitting tight and not
chucking up--wherefore, after all, _vive_ the old delusion and fill
again the flowing stylograph--for I am sure Alfred writes with one....
The afternoons and the aspects here are most incongruously lovely--and
so must be yours. But it's goodnight now, and I am most truly yours,
dear Mrs. Sutro,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Miss Rhoda Broughton._

/*
Lamb House, Rye.
August 10th, 1914.
*/

/*
Dearest Rhoda!
*/

It is not a figure of speech but an absolute truth that even if I had
not received your very welcome and sympathetic script I should be
writing to you this day. I have been on the very edge of it for the last
week--so had my desire to make you a sign of remembrance and
participation come to a head; and verily I must--or may--almost claim
that this all but "crosses" with your own. The only blot on our
unanimity is that it's such an unanimity of woe. Black and hideous to me
is the tragedy that gathers, and I'm sick beyond cure to have lived on
to see it. You and I, the ornaments of our generation, should have been
spared this wreck of our belief that through the long years we had seen
civilization grow and the worst become impossible. The tide that bore us
along was then all the while moving to _this_ as its grand Niagara--yet
what a blessing we didn't know it. It seems to me to _undo_ everything,
everything that was ours, in the most horrible retroactive way--but I
avert my face from the monstrous scene!--you can hate it and blush for
it without my help; we can each do enough of that by ourselves. The
country and the season here are of a beauty of peace, and loveliness of
light, and summer grace, that make it inconceivable that just across the
Channel, blue as _paint_ today, the fields of France and Belgium are
being, or about to be, given up to unthinkable massacre and misery. One
is ashamed to admire, to enjoy, to take any of the normal pleasure, and
the huge shining indifference of Nature strikes a chill to the heart and
makes me wonder of what abysmal mystery, or villainy indeed, such a
cruel smile is the expression. In the midst of it all at any rate we
walked, this strange Sunday afternoon (9th), my niece Peggy, her
youngest brother and I, about a mile out, across the blessed grass
mostly, to see and have tea with a genial old Irish friend (Lady Mathew,
who has a house here for the summer,) and came away an hour later
bearing with us a substantial green volume, by an admirable eminent
hand, which our hostess had just read with such a glow of satisfaction
that she overflowed into easy lending. I congratulate you on having
securely put it forth before this great distraction was upon us--for I
am utterly pulled up in the midst of a rival effort by finding that my
job won't at all consent to be done in the face of it. The picture of
little private adventures simply fades away before the great public. I
take great comfort in the presence of my two young companions, and above
all in having caught my nephew by the coat-tail only _just_ as he was
blandly starting for the continent on Aug. 1st. Poor Margaret Payson is
trapped somewhere in France--she _having_ then started, though not for
Germany, blessedly; and we remain wholly without news of her. Peggy and
Aleck have four or five near maternal relatives lost in Germany--though
as Americans they may fare a little less dreadfully there than if they
were English. And I have numerous friends--we all have, haven't
we?--inaccessible and unimaginable there; it's becoming an anguish to
think of them. Nevertheless I do believe that we shall be again gathered
into a blessed little Chelsea drawing-room--it will be like the
reopening of the salons, so irrepressibly, after the French revolution.
So only sit tight, and invoke your heroic soul, dear Rhoda, and believe
me more than ever all-faithfully yours,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Mrs. Wharton._


/*
Lamb House, Rye.
August 19th, 1914.
*/

/*
Dearest Edith,
*/

Your letter of the 15th has come--and may this reach you as directly,
though it probably won't. No, I won't make it long--the less that the
irrelevance of all remark, the utter extinction of everything, in the
face of these immensities, leaves me as "all silent and all damned" as
you express that it leaves _you_. I find it the strangest state to have
lived on and on for--and yet, with its wholesale annihilation, it _is_
somehow life. Mary Cadwal is admirably here--interesting and vivid and
helpful to the last degree, and Bessie Lodge and her boy had the
heavenly beauty, this afternoon, to come down from town (by train
s'entend) rien que for tea--she even sneakingly went first to the inn
for luncheon--and was off again by 5.30, nobly kind and beautiful and
good. (She sails in the Olympic with her aunt on Saturday.) Mary C.
gives me a sense of the interest of your Paris which makes me understand
how it must attach you--how it would attach me in your place. Infinitely
thrilling and touching such a community with the so all-round
incomparable nation. I feel on my side an immense community here, where
the tension is proportionate to the degree to which we feel engaged--in
other words up to the chin, up to the eyes, if necessary. Life goes on
after a fashion, but I find it a nightmare from which there is no waking
save by sleep. I _go_ to sleep, as if I were dog-tired with action--yet
feel like the chilled _vieillards_ in the old epics, infirm and helpless
at home with the women, while the plains are ringing with battle. The
season here is monotonously magnificent--and we look inconceivably off
across the blue channel, the lovely rim, toward the nearness of the
horrors that are in perpetration just beyond.... I manage myself to try
to "work"--even if I _had_, after experiment, to give up trying to make
certain little _fantoches_ and their private adventure _tenir debout_.
_They_ are laid by on the shelf--the private adventure so utterly
blighted by the public; but I have got hold of something else, and I
find the effort of concentration to some extent an antidote. Apropos of
which I thank you immensely for D'Annunzio's frenchified ode--a wondrous
and magnificent thing in its kind, even if running too much--for my
"taste"--to the vituperative and the execrational. The Latin Renascence
mustn't be too much for and by _that_--for which its facile resources
are so great.... What's magnificent to me in the French themselves at
this moment is their lapse of expression.... May this not fail of you! I
am your all-faithfully tender and true old

/*
H. J.
*/




_To Mrs. W. K. Clifford._


/*
Lamb House, Rye.
August 22nd, 1914.
*/

/*
Dearest Lucy,
*/

I have, I know, been quite portentously silent--your brief card of
distress to-night (Saturday p.m.--) makes me feel it--but you on your
side will also have felt the inevitability of this absence of mere vain
and vague remark in the presence of such prodigious realities. My
overwhelmed sense of them has simply left me nothing to say--the rupture
with all the blest old proportion of things has been so complete and
utter, and I've felt as if most of my friends (from very few of whom I
have heard at all) were so wrapped in gravities and dignities of silence
that it wasn't fair to write to them simply to make _them_ write. And
so it has gone--the whole thing defying expression so that one has just
stared at the horror and watched it grow. But I am not writing now,
dearest old friend, to express either alarm or despair--and this mainly
by reason of there being so high a decency in _not_ doing so. I hate not
to possess my soul--and oh I should like, while I am _about_ that, to
possess yours for you too. One doesn't possess one's soul unless one
squares oneself a good deal, in fact very hard indeed, for the purpose;
but in proportion as one succeeds that means preparation, and
preparation means confidence, and confidence means force, and that is as
far as we need go for the moment. Your few words express a bad
apprehension which I don't share--and which even our straight outlook
here over the blue channel of all these amazing days, toward the
unthinkable horrors of its almost other edge, doesn't _make_ me share. I
don't in the least believe that the Germans will be "here"--with us
generally--because I don't believe--I don't admit--that anything so
abject as the allowance of it by our overwhelming Fleet, in conditions
making it so tremendously difficult for them (the G.'s), is in the least
conceivable. Things are not going to be so easy for them as
that--however uneasy they may be for ourselves. I _insist_ on a great
confidence--I cultivate it as resolutely as I can, and if we were only
nearer together I think I should be able to help you to some of the
benefit of it. I have been very thankful to be on this spot all these
days--I mean in this sympathetic little old house, which has somehow
assuaged in a manner the nightmare. One invents _arts_ for assuaging
it--of which some work better than others. The great sore sense I find
the futility of talk--_about_ the cataclysm: this is so impossible that
I can really almost talk about other things!... I am supposing you see a
goodish many people--since one hears that there are so many in town,
and I am glad for you of that: solitude in these conditions being grim,
even if society is bleak! I try to read and I rather succeed, and also
even to write, and find the effort of it greatly pays. Lift up your
heart, dearest friend--I believe we shall meet to embrace and look back
and tell each other how appallingly interesting the whole thing "was." I
gather in all of you right affectionately and am yours, in particular,
dearest Lucy, so stoutly and tenderly,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To William James, junior._


_Dictated._

/*
Lamb House, Rye.
August 31st, 1914.
*/

/*
Dearest Bill,
*/

Very blest to me this morning, and very blest to Peggy and Aleck and me,
your momentous and delightful cable. I don't know that we are either of
us much versed in the weight of babies, but we have strong and, I find,
unanimous views about their sex, which your little adventurer into this
world of woe has been so good as gracefully to meet. We are all three
thoroughly glad of the nephew in him, if only because of being glad of
the little brother. We are convinced that that's the way his parents
feel, and I hope the feeling is so happy a one for Alice as to be doing
her all sorts of good. Admirable the "all well" of your cable: may it go
straight on toward better and better....

Our joy in your good news is the only gleam of anything of the sort with
which we have been for a long time visited; as an admirable letter from
you to Aleck, which he read me last night, seemed to indicate (more than
anything we have yet had from home) some definite impression of. Yes
indeed, we are steeped in the very air of anxieties and horrors--and
they all seem, where we are situated, so little far away. I have written
two or three times to Harry, and also to your Mother, since leaving
London, and Peggy and Aleck in particular have had liberal responses
from each. But those received up to now rather suggest a failure quite
to grasp the big black realities of the whole case roundabout us far and
near. The War blocks out of course--for that you have realised--every
other object and question, every other thinkability, in life; and I
needn't tell you what a strain it all is on the nerves and the faith of
a poor old damaged septuagenarian uncle. The extraordinary thing is the
way that every interest and every connection that seemed still to exist
up to exactly a month ago has been as annihilated as if it had never
lifted a head in the world at all.... That isn't, with reflection, so
far as one can "calmly" reflect, _all_ that I see; on the contrary there
is a way of looking at what is taking place that is positively helpful,
or almost, when one can concentrate on it at all--which is difficult. I
mean the view that the old systematic organisation and consecration of
such forces as are now let loose, of their unspeakable infamy and
insanity, is undergoing such a triumphant exhibition in respect to the
loathsomeness and madness of the same, that it is what we must all
together be most face to face with when the actual blackness of the
smoke shall have cleared away. But I can't go into that now, any more
than I can make this letter long, dearest Bill and dearest Alice, or can
say anything just now in particular reference to what is happening....
You get in Boston probably about as much news as we do, for this is
enormously, and quite justly, under control of the authorities, and
nothing reaches us but what is in the interest of operations,
precautions, every kind of public disposition and consideration, for the
day and hour. This country is making an enormous effort--so far as its
Fleet is concerned a triumphantly powerful and successful one; and there
is a great deal more of the effort to come. Roughly speaking, Germany,
immensely prepared and with the biggest fighting-power ever known on
earth, has staked her all on a colossal onslaught, and yet is far even
yet from having done with it what she believed she would in the time, or
on having done it _as_ she first designed. The horrors of the
crucifixion of Belgium, the general atrocity of the Kaiser's methods,
haven't even yet entirely availed, and there are chances not
inconsiderable, even while I write, that they won't entirely avail; that
is that certain things may still happen to prevent them. But it is all
for the moment tremendously dark and awful. We kind of huddle together
here and try to lead our lives in such small dignity and piety as we
may.... More and more is it a big fact in the colossal public situation
that Germany is absolutely locked up at last in a maritime way, with all
the seas swept of her every vessel of commerce. She appears now
absolutely corked, her commerce and communications dead as a doornail,
and the British activity in undisturbed possession of the seas. This by
itself is an enormous service, an immeasurable and finally determinant
one, surely, rendered by this country to the Allies. But after hanging
over dearest Alice ever so blessingly again, and tickling the new little
infant phenomenon with a now quite practised old affectionate nose, I
must pull off and be just, dearest Bill, your own all-fondest old Uncle,

/*
H. J.
*/




_To Mrs. W. K. Clifford._


_Dictated._

/*
Lamb House, Rye.
August 31st, 1914.
*/

/*
Dearest L. C.
*/

I am reduced again, you see, to this aid to correspondence, which I feel
myself indeed fortunate to possess, under the great oppression of the
atmosphere in which we live. It makes recuperation doubly difficult in
case of recurrence of old ailments, and I have been several days in bed
with a renewed kick of the virus of my dismal long illness of 1910-11
and am on my feet to-day for the first time. Fortunately I know better
how to deal with it now, and with a little time I come round. But it
leaves me heavy-fingered. One is heavy-everything, for that matter, amid
these horrors--over which I won't and can't expatiate, and hang and
pore. That way madness lies, and one must try to economise, and not
disseminate, one's forces of resistance--to the prodigious public total
of which I think we can each of us, in his or her own way, individually,
and however obscurely, contribute. To this end, very kindly, _don't send
me on newspapers_--I very particularly beseech you; it seems so to
suggest that you imagine us living in privation of, or indifference to
them: which is somehow such a sorry image. We are drenched with them and
live up to our neck in them; _all_ the London morning ones by 8 a.m.,
and every scrap of an evening one by about 6.40 p.m. We see the former
thus at exactly the same hour we should in town, and the last forms in
which the latter appear very little more belatedly. They are not just
now very exhilarating--but I can only take things in in waiting
silence--bracing myself unutterably, and holding on somehow (though to
God knows what!) in presence of perpetrations so gratuitously and
infamously hideous as the destruction of Louvain and its accompaniments,
for which I can't believe there won't be a tremendous day of reckoning.
Frederic Harrison's letter in to-day's "Times" will have been as much a
relief to my nerves and yours, and to those of millions of others, as to
his own splendidly fine old inflamed ones; meaning by nerves everything
that shall most formidably clamour within us for the recorded execration
of history. I find this more or less helpless assisting at the so
long-drawn-out martyrdom of the admirable little Belgium the very
intensest part of one's anguish, and my one support in it is to lose
myself in dreams and visions of what must be done eventually, with
_real_ imagination and magnanimity, and above all with _real_ material
generosity, to help her unimaginable lacerations to heal. The same
inscrutable irony of ethereal peace and serenity goes on shedding itself
here from the face of nature, who has "turned out" for us such a summer
of blandness and beauty as would have been worthy of a better cause. It
still goes on, though of course we should be glad of more rain; but
occasional downfalls even of that heavenly dew haven't quite failed us,
and more of it will very presumably now come. There is no one here in
particular for me to tell you of, and if it weren't that Peggy is with
me I should be pretty high and dry in the matter of human converse and
contact. She intensely prefers to remain with me for the present--and if
she _should_ have to leave I think I on my side should soon after have
to return to my London perch; finding as I do that almost absolute
solitude under the assault of all the horrors isn't at all a good thing
for me. However, that is not a practical question yet.... I think of
you all faithfully and fondly.

/*
Ever your old devotedest

H. J.
*/




_To Mrs. Wharton._

/#
     This moment was that of the height of the "Russian legend," and
     like everyone else H. J. was eagerly welcoming the multitudinous
     evidence of the passage of a vast Russian army through England to
     France.
#/


_Dictated._

/*
Lamb House, Rye.
September 1st, 1914.
*/

/*
Dear E. W.,
*/

Cast your intelligent eye on the picture from this a.m.'s Daily Mail
that I send you and which you may not otherwise happen to see. Let it
rest, with all its fine analytic power, on the types, the dress, the
caps and the boots of the so-called Belgians disembarked--disembarked
from _where, juste ciel_!--at Ostend, and be struck as I have been as
soon as the thing was shown to me this a.m. by the notice-taking Skinner
(my brave Dr.,) so much more notice-taking than so many of the persons
around us. If they are not straight out of the historic, or even
fictive, page of Tolstoy, I will eat the biggest pair of moujik boots in
the collection! With which Skinner told me of speech either this morning
or last evening, on his part, with a man whose friend or brother, I
forget which, had just written him from Sheffield: "Train after train of
Russians have been passing through here to-day (Sunday); they _are_ a
rum-looking lot!" But an enormous quantity of this apparently
corroborative testimony from _seen trains_, with their contents stared
at and wondered at, has within two or three days kept coming in from
various quarters. Quantum valeat! I consider the reproduced snap-shot
enclosed, however, a regular gem of evidence. What a blessing, after
all, is our--_our_--refined visual sense!

This isn't really by way of answer to your own most valuable letter this
morning received--but that is none the less gratefully noted, and shall
have its independent acknowledgment. I am better, thank you, distinctly;
the recovery of power to eat again means everything to me. I greatly
appreciated your kind little letter to my most interesting and admirable
Peggy, whom you left under the charm.

My own small domestic plot here rocks beneath my feet, since yesterday
afternoon, with the decision at once to volunteer of my invaluable and
irreplaceable little Burgess! I had been much expecting and even hoping
for it, but definitely shrinking from the responsibility of
administering the push with my own hand: I wanted the impulse to play up
of itself. It now appears that it had played up from the first,
inwardly--with the departure of the little Rye contingent for Dover a
fortnight ago. The awfully decent little chap had then felt the pang of
patriotism and martial ardour _rentrés_ and had kept silent for fear of
too much incommoding me by doing otherwise. But now the clearance has
taken place in the best way in the world, and I part with him in a day
or two.

...This is all now save that I am always yours too much for typists,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Mrs. Richard Watson Gilder._


_Dictated._

/*
Lamb House, Rye.
September 2nd, 1914.
*/

/*
My dear Helena,
*/

...We are passing here, as you may well suppose, through the regular
fiery furnace, the sharpest ordeal and the most tremendous, even on
these shores, that the generations have been through since any keeping
of accounts, and yet mild, as one keeps reminding oneself, in comparison
with the lacerations of France and the martyrdoms of Belgium. It leaves
one small freedom of mind for general talk, it presses, all the while,
with every throb of consciousness; and if during the first days I felt
in the air the recall of our Civil War shocks and anxieties, and
hurryings and doings, of 1861, etc., the pressure in question has
already become a much nearer and bigger thing, and a more formidable and
tragic one, than anything we of the North in those years had to face. It
lights up for me rather what the tension was, what it must have been, in
the South--though with difference even in that correspondence. The South
was more destitute than these rich countries are likely even at the
worst to find themselves, but on the other hand the German hordes, to
speak only of them, are immeasurably more formidable and merciless than
our comparatively benign Northern armies ever approached being. However,
I didn't mean to go into these historical parallels--any more than I
feel able, dear Helena, to go into many points of any kind. One of the
effects of this colossal convulsion is that all connection with
everything of every kind that has gone before seems to have broken short
off in a night, and nothing ever to have happened of the least
consequence or relevance, beside what is happening now. Therefore when
you express to me so beautifully and touchingly your interest in my
"Notes" of--another life and planet, as one now can but feel, I have to
make an enormous effort to hitch the allusion to my present
consciousness. I knew you would enter deeply into the chapter about
Minnie Temple, and had your young, your younger intimacy with her at the
back of my consciousness even while I wrote. I had in mind a small, a
very small, number of persons who would be peculiarly reached by what I
was doing and would really know what I was talking about, as the mass of
others couldn't, and you were of course in that distinguished little
group. I could but leave you to be as deeply moved as I was sure you
would be, and surely I can but be glad to have given you the occasion. I
remember your telling me long ago that you were not allowed during that
last year to have access to her; but I myself, for most of it, was still
further away, and yet the vividness of her while it went on seems none
the less to have been preserved for us all alike, only waiting for a
right pressure of the spring to bring it out. What is most pathetic in
the light of to-day has seemed to me the so tragically little real care
she got, the little there was real knowledge enough, or presence of mind
enough, to do for her, so that she was probably sacrificed in a degree
and a way that would be impossible to-day. I thank you at any rate for
letting me know that you have, as you say, relievingly wept. For the
rest your New England summer life, amid your abounding hills and woods
and waters, to say nothing of the more intimate strong savour your
children must impart to it, shines upon me here, from far across the
sea, as a land of brighter dream than it's easy to think of mankind
anywhere as dreaming. I am delighted to hear that these things are thus
comfortable and auspicious with you. The interest of your work on
Richard's Life wouldn't be interesting to you if it were not tormenting,
and wouldn't be tormenting if it were not so considerably worth doing.
But, as I say, one sees everything without exception that has been a
part of past history through the annihilation of battle smoke if of
nothing else, and all questions, again, swoon away into the obscure. If
you have got something to do, stick to it tight, and do it with faith
and force; some things will, no doubt, eventually be redeemed. I don't
speak of the actualities of the public situation here at this
moment--because I can't say things in the air about them. But this
country is making the most enormous, the most invaluable, and the most
inspired effort she has ever had to put her hand to, and though the
devastating Huns are thundering but just across the Channel--which looks
so strangely serene in a present magnificence of summer--she won't have
failed, I am convinced, of a prodigious saving achievement.

/*
Yours, my dear Helena, all affectionately,

HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Mrs. Wharton._

/#
     It should be mentioned that Mrs. Wharton had come to England, but
     was planning an early return to Paris.
#/


_Dictated._

/*
Lamb House, Rye.
September 3rd, 1914.
*/

/*
My dear E. W.,
*/

It's a great luxury to be able to go on in this way. I wired you at once
this morning how very glad indeed I shall be to take over your
superfluous young man as a substitute for Burgess, if he will come in
the regular way, _my_ servant entirely, not borrowed from you
(otherwise than in the sense of his going back to you whenever you shall
want him again;) and remaining with me on a wage basis settled by me
with him, and about the same as Burgess's, if possible, so long as the
latter is away....

I am afraid indeed now, after this lapse of days, that the "Russian"
legend doesn't very particularly hold water--some information I have
this morning in the way of a positive denial of the War Office points
that way, unless the sharp denial is conceivable _quand même_. The only
thing is that there remains an extraordinary residuum of fact to be
accounted for: it being indisputable by too much convergence of
testimony that trains upon trains of troops seen in the light of day,
and not recognised by innumerable watchers and wonderers as English,
were pouring down from the north and to the east during the end of last
week and the beginning of this. It seems difficult that there should
have been that amount of variously scattered hallucination,
misconception, fantastication or whatever--yet I chuck up the sponge!

Far from brilliant the news to-day of course, and likely I am afraid to
act on your disposition to go back to Paris; which I think a very
gallant and magnificent and ideal one, but which at the same time I well
understand, within you, the urgent force of. I feel I cannot take upon
myself to utter any relevant remark about it at all--any plea against
it, which you wouldn't in the least mind, once the thing _determined_
for you, or any in favour of it, which you so intensely don't require. I
understand too well--that's the devil of such a state of mind about
everything. Whatever resolution you take and apply you will put it
through to your very highest honour and accomplishment of service; _sur
quoi_ I take off my hat to you down to the ground, and only desire not
to worry you with vain words.... I kind of hanker for any scrap of
really domestic fact about you all that I may be able to extract from
Frederick if he comes. But I shall get at you again quickly in this way,
and am your all-faithfullest

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Mrs. Wharton._

/#
     It will be remembered that the first news of the bombardment of
     Rheims Cathedral suggested greater destruction than was the fact at
     that time. The wreckage was of course carried much further before
     the end of the war.
#/


/*
Lamb House, Rye.
September 21st, 1914.
*/

/*
Dearest Edith,
*/

Rheims is the most unspeakable and immeasurable horror and infamy--and
what is appalling and heart-breaking is that it's "_for ever and ever_."
But no words fill the abyss of it--nor touch it, nor relieve one's heart
nor light by a spark the blackness; the ache of one's howl and the
anguish of one's execration aren't mitigated by a shade, even as one
brands it as the most hideous crime ever perpetrated against the mind of
man. There it _was_--and now all the tears of rage of all the bereft
millions and all the crowding curses of all the wondering ages will
never bring a stone of it back! Yet one tries--even now--tries to get
something from saying that the measure is so full as to overflow at last
in a sort of vindictive deluge (though for all the stones that _that_
will replace!) and that the arm of final retributive justice becomes by
it an engine really in some degree proportionate to the act. I
positively do think it helps me a little, to think of how they can be
made to wear the shame, in the pitiless glare of history, forever and
ever--and not even to get rid of it when they are maddened, literally,
by the weight. And for that the preparations must have already at this
hour begun: how _can't_ they be as a tremendous force fighting on the
side, fighting in the very fibres, of France? I think too
somehow--though I don't know _why_, practically--of how nothing
conceivable could have so damned and dished them forever in our great
art-loving country!

...If you go on Thursday I can't hope to see you again for the present,
but all my blessings on all your splendid resolution, your courage and
charity! Right must you be not to take back with you any of your
Englishry--it's no place for them yet. Frederick will hang on your first
signal to him again--and meanwhile is a very great boon to me. I wish I
could do something for White, if (as I take it) he stays behind; put him
up at the Athenaeum or something.... All homage and affection to you,
dearest Edith, from your desolate and devoted old

/*
H. J.
*/




_To Mrs. T. S. Perry._


_Dictated._

/*
Lamb House, Rye.
September 22nd, 1914.
*/

/*
My dear Lilla,
*/

Forgive my use of this fierce legibility to speak to you in my now at
best faltering accents. We eat and drink, and talk and walk and think,
we sleep and wake and live and breathe only the War, and it is a bitter
regimen enough and such as, frankly, I hoped I shouldn't live on,
disillusioned and horror-ridden, to see the like of. Not, however, that
there isn't an uplifting and thrilling side to it, as far as this
country is concerned, which makes unspeakably for interest, makes one
at hours forget all the dreadfulness and cling to what it means in
another way. What it above all means, and has meant for me all summer,
is that, looking almost straight over hence from the edge of the
Channel, toward the horizon-rim just beyond the curve of which the
infamous violation of Belgium has been all these weeks kept up, I
haven't had to face the shame of our not having drawn the sword for the
massacred and tortured Flemings, and not having left our inestimable
France, after vows exchanged, to shift for herself. England all but
grovelled in the dust to the Kaiser for peace up to the very latest
hour, but when his last reply was simply to let loose his hordes on
Belgium in silence, with no account of the act to this country or to
France beyond the most fatuously arrogant "Because I choose to, damn
you!" in all recorded history, there began for us here a process of
pulling ourselves together of which the end is so far from being yet
that I feel it as only the most rudimentary beginning. However, I said I
couldn't talk--and here I am talking, and I mustn't go on, it all takes
me too far; I must only feel that all your intelligence and all your
sympathy, yours and dear Thomas's, and those of every one of you, is
intensely with us--and that the appalling and crowning horror of the
persistent destruction of Rheims, which we just learn, isn't even wanted
to give the measure of the insanity of ferocity and presumption against
which Europe is making a stand. Do ask Thomas to write me a
participating word: and think of me meanwhile as very achingly and
shakily but still all confidently and faithfully yours,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Miss Rhoda Broughton._


/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.
October 1st, 1914.
*/

/*
My dear Rhoda,
*/

...For myself, with Peggy's necessary departure from my side some three
weeks ago, I could no longer endure the solitudinous (and platitudinous)
side of my rural retreat; I found I simply ate my heart out in the state
of privation of converse (any converse that counted) and of remoteness
from the source of information--as our information goes. So, having very
blessedly this perch to come to, here I am while the air of superficial
summer still reigns. London is agitating but interesting--in certain
aspects I find it even quite uplifting--and the mere feeling that the
huge burden of one's tension is shared is something of a relief, even if
it does show the strain as so much reflected back to one. Immensely do I
understand the need of younger men to take refuge from it in _doing_,
for all they are worth--to be old and doddering now is for a male person
not at all glorious. But if to _feel_, with consuming passion, under the
call of the great cause, is any sort of attestation of use, then I
contribute my fond vibration.... During these few days in town I have
seen almost no one, and this London, which is, to the eye, immensely
full of people (I mean of the sort who are not here usually at this
season,) is also a strange, rather sinister London in the sense that
"social intercourse" seems (and most naturally) scarcely to exist. I'm
afraid that even your salon, were you here, would inevitably become more
or less aware of the shrinkage. Let that console you a little for not
yet setting it up. Dear little ---- I shall try to see--I grieve
deeply over her complication of horrors. We all have the latter, but
some people (and those the most amiable and most innocent) seem to have
them with an extra devilish twist. Not "sweets" to the sweet now, but a
double dose of bitterness. It's all a huge strain and a huge nightmare
and a huge unspeakability--but that isn't my last word or my last
_sense_. This great country has found, and is still more finding,
certain parts of herself again that had seemed for long a good deal
lost. But here they are now--magnificent; and we haven't yet seen a
quarter of them. The whole will press down the scale of fortune. What we
all are together (in our so unequal ways) "out for" we shall _do_,
through thick and thin and whatever enormity of opposition. We
sufficiently want to and we sufficiently _can_--both by material and
volition. Therefore if we don't achieve, it will only be because we have
lost our essential, our admirable, our soundest and roundest
identity--and that is simply inconceivable to your faithful and
affectionate old

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Edmund Gosse._

/#
     The allusions in the following are to an article of Mr. Gosse's on
     the effect of the war of 1870 upon French literature, and to the
     publication at this moment of H. J.'s _Notes on Novelists_.
#/


_Dictated._

/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.
October 15th, 1914.
*/

/*
My dear Gosse,
*/

...Your article for the Edinburgh is of an admirable interest,
beautifully done, for the number of things so happily and vividly
expressed in it, and attaching altogether from its emotion and its
truth. How much, alas, to say on the whole portentous issue (I mean the
particular one you deal with) must one feel there is--and the more the
further about one looks and thinks! It makes me much want to see you
again, and we must speedily arrange for that. I am probably doing on
Saturday something very long out of order for me--going to spend Sunday
with a friend near town; but as quickly as possible next week shall I
appeal to you to come and lunch with me: in fact why not now ask you to
let it be either on Tuesday or Wednesday, 20th or 21st, as suits you
best, here, at 1.30? A word as to this at any time up to Tuesday a.m.,
and by telephone as well as any otherhow, will be all sufficient.

Momentous indeed your recall, with such exactitude and authority, of the
effect in France of the 1870-71 cataclysm, and interesting to me as
bringing back what I seem to myself to have been then almost closely
present at; so that the sense of it all again flushes for me. I remember
how the death of the immense old Dumas didn't in the least emerge to the
naked eye, and how one vaguely heard that poor Gautier, "librarian to
the Empress," had in a day found everything give way beneath him and let
him go down and down! What analogies verily, I fear, with some of our
present aspects and prospects! I didn't so much as know till your page
told me that Jules Lemaître was killed by that stroke: awfully tragic
and pathetic fact. Gautier but just survived the whole other
convulsion--it had led to his death early in '73. Felicitous
Sainte-Beuve, who had got out of the way, with his incomparable
penetration, just the preceding year! Had I been at your elbow I should
have suggested a touch or two about dear old George Sand, holding out
through the darkness at Nohant, but even there giving out some lights
that are caught up in her letters of the moment. Beautiful that you put
the case as you do for the newer and younger Belgians, and affirm it
with such emphasis for Verhaeren--at present, I have been told, in this
country. Immense my respect for those who succeed in going on, as you
tell of Gaston Paris's having done during that dreadful winter and
created life and force by doing. I myself find concentration of an
extreme difficulty: the proportions of things have so changed and one's
poor old "values" received such a shock. I say to myself that this is
all the more reason why one should recover as many of them as possible
and keep hold of them in the very interest of civilisation and of the
honour of our race; as to which I am certainly right--but it takes some
doing! Tremendous the little fact you mention (though indeed I had taken
it for granted) about the _absolute_ cessation of ---- 's last
"big sale" after Aug. 1st. Very considerable his haul, fortunately--and
_if_ gathered in!--up to the eve of the fell hour.... All I myself hear
from Paris is an occasional word from Mrs. Wharton, who is full of
ardent activity and ingenious devotion there--a really heroic plunge
into the breach. But this is all now, save that I am sending you a
volume of gathered-in (for the first time) old critical papers, the
publication of which was arranged for in the spring, and the book then
printed and seen through the press, so that there has been for me a kind
of painful inevitability in its so grotesquely and false-notedly coming
out now. But no--I also say to myself--nothing serious and felt and
sincere, nothing "good," is anything but essentially in order to-day,
whether economically and "attractively" so or not! Put my volume at any
rate away on a high shelf--to be taken down again only in the better and
straighter light that I invincibly believe in the dawning of. Let me
hear, however sparely, about Tuesday or Wednesday and believe me all
faithfully yours,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Miss Grace Norton._

/#
     "W. E. D." is William Darwin, brother-in-law to Charles Eliot
     Norton. "Richard" is the latter's son, Director of the American
     School of Archaeology in Rome, at this time engaged in organising a
     motor-ambulance of American volunteers in France. He unhappily died
     of meningitis in Paris, August 2, 1918.
#/


/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.
October 16th, 1914.
*/

/*
Very dear old Friend,
*/

How can I thank you enough for the deep intelligence and sympathy of
your beautiful and touching little letter, this morning received, or
sufficiently bless the impulse that made you write it? For really the
strain and stress of the whole horribly huge case over here is such that
the hand of understanding and sympathy reached out across the sea causes
a grateful vibration, and among all our vibrations those of gratitude
don't seem appointed to be on the whole the most numerous: though indeed
I mustn't speak as if within our very own huge scope we have _not_
plenty of those too! That we can feel, or that the individual, poor
resisting-as-he-can creature, may on such a scale feel, and so intensely
and potently, _with_ the endlessly multitudinous others who are subject
to the same assault, and such hundreds of thousands of them to so much
greater--this is verily his main great spiritual harbourage; since so
many of those that need more or less to serve have become now but the
waste of waters! Happy are those of your and my generation, in very
truth, who have been able, or may still be, to do as dear W. E. D. so
enviably did, and close their eyes without the sense of deserting their
post or dodging their duty. We feel, don't we? that we have stuck to and
done ours long enough to have a right to say "Oh, _this_ wasn't in the
bargain; it's the claim of Fate only in the form of a ruffian or a
swindler, and with such I'll have no dealing:"--the perfection of which
felicity, I have but just heard, so long after the event, was that of
poor dear fine Jules Lemaître, who, unwell at the end of July and having
gone down to his own little native _pays_, on the Loire, to be _soigné_,
read in the newspaper of the morrow that war upon France had been
declared, and fell back on the instant into a swoon from which he never
awoke.... The happiest, almost the enviable (except those who may
emulate William) are the younger doers of things and engagers in action,
like our admirable Richard (for I find him so admirable!) whom I can't
sufficiently commend and admire for having thrown himself into Paris,
where he can most serve. But I won't say much more now, save that I
think of you with something that I should call the liveliest renewal of
affection if my affection for you had ever been _less_ than lively! I
rejoice in whatever Peggy has been able to tell you of me; but don't
you, on your side, fall into the error of regretting that she came back.
I have done nothing so much since her departure as bless the day of it;
so wrong a place does this more and more become for those whose life
isn't definitely fixed here, and so little could I have borne the
anxiety and responsibility of having her on my mind in addition to
having myself! Have me on _yours_, dearest Grace, as much as you like,
for it is exquisitely sensible to me that you so faithfully and tenderly
do; and that does nothing but good--real helpful good, to yours all
affectionately,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Mrs. Wharton._

/#
     A passage (translated by M. Alfred de Saint André) from H. J.'s
     letter to Mrs. Wharton of September 3rd (see above) had been read
     at a meeting of the Académie Française, and published in the
     _Journal des Débats_. The Hôtel d'Iéna was at this time the
     headquarters of the British Red Cross Society in Paris.
#/


/*
21 Carlyle Mansions, Cheyne Walk, S.W.
October 17th, 1914.
*/

/*
Very dear old Friend!
*/

Yesterday came your brave letter with its two so remarkable enclosures
and also the interesting one lent me to read by Dorothy Ward. The sense
they give me of your heroic tension and valour is something I can't
express--any more than I need to for your perfect assurance of it.
Posted here in London your letter was by the Walter Gays, whom I hunger
and thirst for, though without having as yet got more into touch than
through a telephone message on their behalf an hour ago by the manager,
or whoever, of their South Kensington Hotel. I most unfortunately can't
see them this p.m. as they proposed, as I am booked for the long
un-precedented adventure of going down for a couple of nights to
Qu'acre; in response to a most touching and not-to-be-resisted letter
from its master. G. L. and P. L. are both to be there apparently; and I
really rather welcome the break for a few hours with the otherwise
unbroken pitch of London. However, let me not so much as name that in
presence of your tremendous pitch of Paris; which however is all mixed,
in my consciousness with yours, so that the intensity of yours drums
through, all the while, as the big note. With all my heart do I bless
the booming work (though not the booming anything else) which makes for
you from day to day the valid _carapace_, the invincible, if not perhaps
strictly invulnerable, armour. So golden-plated you shine straight over
at me--and at us all!

Of the liveliest interest to me of course the Débats version of the poor
old Rheims passage of my letter to you at the time of the horror--in
respect to which I feel so greatly honoured by such grand courtesy shown
it, and by the generous translation, for which I shall at the first
possible moment write and thank Saint André, from whom I have also had
an immensely revealing small photograph of one of the aspects of the
outraged cathedral, the vividest picture of the irreparable ravage.
Splendid indeed and truly precious your report of the address of that
admirable man to the Rheims tribunal at the hour of supreme trial. I
echo with all my soul your lively homage to it, and ask myself if
anything on earth can ever have been so blackly grotesque (or
grotesquely black!) as the sublimely smug proposal of the Germans to
wipe off the face of the world as a living force--substituting for it
apparently _their_ portentous, their cumbrous and complicated idiom--the
race that has for its native incomparable tone, such form, such speech,
such reach, such an expressional consciousness, as humanity was on that
occasion honoured and, so to speak, transfigured, by being able to find
(M. Louis Bossu aiding!) in its chords. What a splendid creation of
life, on the excellent man's part, just by play of the resource most
familiar and most indispensable to him!

This is all at this moment.... I have still five pounds of your cheque
in hand--wanting only to bestow it where I practically see it used. I
haven't sent more to Rye, but conferred three a couple of days since on
an apparently most meritorious, and most intelligently-worked, refuge
for some 60 or 70 that is being carried on, in the most fraternal
spirit, by a real working-class circle at Hammersmith. I shall distil
your balance with equal care; and I accompany each of your donations
with a like sum of my own. We are sending off hence now every day
regularly some 7 or 8 London papers to the Hôtel d'Iéna.

/*
Yours all faithfully,

HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Thomas Sergeant Perry._


_Dictated._

/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S. W.
25th Oct., 1914.
*/

/*
My dear Thomas,
*/

I have had a couple of letters from you of late for which I thank you,
but the contents of which reach me, you will understand, but through all
the obstruction and oppression and obsession of all our conditions
here--the strain and stress of which seem at times scarcely to be borne.
Nevertheless we do bear them--to my sense magnificently; so that if
during the very first weeks the sense of the huge public horror which
seemed to have been appointed to poison the final dregs of my
consciousness was nothing but sickening and overwhelming, so now I have
lived on, as we all have, into much of another vision: I at least feel
and take such an interest in the present splendid activity and position
and office of this country, and in all the fine importance of it that
beats upon one from all round, that the whole effect is uplifting and
thrilling and consoling enough to carry one through whatever darkness,
whatever dismals. As I think I said in a few words some weeks ago to
Lilla, dear old England is not a whit less sound, less fundamentally
sane, than she ever was, but in fact ever so much _finer_ and inwardly
wiser, and has been appointed by the gods to find herself again, without
more delay, in some of those aspects and on some of those sides that she
had allowed to get too much overlaid and encrusted. She is doing this in
the grand manner, and I can only say that I find the spectacle really
splendid to assist at. After three months in the country I came back to
London early, sequestration there not at all answering for nerves or
spirits, and find myself in this place comparatively nearer to
information and to supporting and suggestive contact. I don't say it
doesn't all at the best even remain much of the nightmare that it
instantly began by being: but gleams and rifts come through as from high
and bedimmed, yet far-looking and, as it were, promising and portending
windows: in fine I should feel I had lost something that ministers to
life and knowledge if our collective experience, for all its big black
streaks, hadn't been imposed on us. Let me not express myself, none the
less, as if I could really thus talk about it all: I can't--it's all too
close and too horrific and too unspeakable and too immeasureable. The
facts, or the falsities, of "news" reach you doubtless as much as they
reach us here--or rather with much more licence: and really what I have
wanted most to say is how deeply I rejoice in the sympathetic sense of
your words, few of these as your couple of notes have devoted to it. You
speak of some other things--that is of the glorious "Institute," and of
the fond severance of your connection with it, and other matters; but I
suppose you will understand when I say that we are so shut in,
roundabout, and so pressed upon by our single huge consciousness of the
public situation, that all other sounds than those that immediately
belong to it pierce the thick medium but with a muffled effect, and that
in fine nothing really draws breath among us but the multitudinous
realities of the War. Think what it must be when even the interest of
the Institute becomes dim and _faint_! But I won't attempt to write you
a word of really current history--ancient history by the time it reaches
you: I throw myself back through all our anxieties and fluctuations,
which I do my best not to be at the momentary mercy of, one way or the
other, to certain deep fundamentals, which I can't go into either, but
which become vivid and sustaining here in the light of all one sees and
feels and gratefully takes in. I find the general community, the whole
scene of energy, immensely sustaining and inspiring--so great a thing,
every way, to be present at that it almost salves over the haunting
sense of all the horrors: though indeed nothing can mitigate the huge
Belgian one, the fact, not seen for centuries, of virtually a whole
nation, harmless and innocent, driven forth into ruin and misery,
suffering of the most hideous sort and on the most unprecedented
scale--unless it be the way that England is making a tremendous pair of
the tenderest arms to gather them into her ample, but so crowded lap.
That is the most haunting thing, but the oppression and obsession are
all heavy enough, and the waking up to them again each morning after the
night's oblivion, if one has at all got it, is a really bad moment to
pass. All life indeed resolves itself into the most ferocious practice
in passing bad moments.... Stand all of you to your guns, and think and
believe how you can really and measurably and morally help us! Yours,
dear Thomas, all faithfully,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Henry James, junior._


_Dictated._

/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.
October 30th, 1914.
*/

/*
Dearest Harry,
*/

...Any "news," of the from day to day kind, would be stale and flat by
the time this reaches you--and you know in New York at the moment of my
writing, very much what we know of our grounds of anxiety and of hope,
grounds of proceeding and production, moral and material, in every sort
and shape. If we only had at this moment the extra million of men that
the now so more or less incredible optimism and amiability of our spirit
toward Germany, during these last abysmal years, kept knocking the
bottom out of our having or preparing, the benefit and the effect would
be heavenly to think of. And yet on the other hand I partly console
myself for the comparatively awkward and clumsy fact that we are only
growing and gathering in that amount of reinforcement _now_, by the
shining light it throws on England's moral position and attitude, her
predominantly incurable good-nature, the sublimity or the egregious
folly, one scarcely knows which to call it, of her innocence in face of
the most prodigiously massed and worked-out intentions of aggression of
which "history furnishes an example." So it is that, though the country
has become at a bound the hugest workshop of every sort of preparation
conceivable, the men have, in the matter of numbers, to be wrought into
armies _after_ instead of before--which has always been England's sweet
old way, and has in the past managed to suffice. The stuff and the
material fortunately, however, are admirable--having had already time to
show to what tune they are; and, as I think I wrote your Mother the
other day, one feels the resources, alike of character and of material,
in the way of men and of every other sort of substance, immense; and so,
not consenting to be heaved to and fro by the short view or the news of
the moment, one rests one's mind on one or two big general
convictions--primarily perhaps that of the certainty that Germany's last
apprehension was that of a prolonged war, that it never entered for a
moment into the arrogance of her programme, that she has every reason to
find such a case ultra-grinding and such a prospect ultra-dismal:
whereas nothing else was taken for granted here, as an absolute grim
necessity, from the first. But I am writing you remarks quite as I
didn't mean to; you have had plenty of these--at least Irving Street has
had--before; and what I would a thousand times rather have, is some
remarks from there, be they only of an ardent sympathy and
participation--as of course whatever else in the world could they be? I
am so utterly and passionately enlisted, up to my eyes and over my aged
head, in the greatness of our cause, that it fairly sickens me not to
find every imagination rise to it: the case--the case of the failure to
rise--then seems to me so base and abject an exhibition! And yet I
remind myself, even as I say [it], that the case has never really once
happened to me--I have personally not encountered any low likeness of
it; and therefore should rather have said that it _would_ so
horrifically affect me _if_ it were supposable. England seems to me, at
the present time, in so magnificent a position before the world, in
respect to the history and logic of her action, that I don't see a grain
in the scale of her rightness that doesn't count for attestation of it;
and in short it really "makes up" almost for some of the huge horrors
that constantly assault our vision, to find one can be on a "side," with
all one's weight, that one never supposed likely to be offered one in
such perfection, and that has only to be exposed to more and more light,
to make one more glory, so to speak, for one's attachment, for one's
association.

_Saturday, Oct. 31st._ I had to break this off yesterday, and now can't
do much for fear of missing today's, a Saturday's American post. Only
everything I tried yesterday to say is more and more before me--all
feelings and impressions intensifying by their very nature, as they do,
from day to day under the general outward pressure, literally the
pressure of _experience_ they from hour to hour receive; such experience
and such pressure for instance as my having pulled up for a few minutes,
as I was beginning this again, to watch from my windows a great swinging
body of the London Scottish, as one supposes, marching past at the
briskest possible step with its long line of freshly enlisted men behind
it. These are now in London, of course, impressions of every hour, or of
every moment; but there is always a particular big thrill in the
collective passage of the stridingly and just a bit flappingly kilted
and bonneted, when it isn't a question of mere parade or exercise, as we
have been used to seeing it, but a suggestion, everything in the air so
aiding, of a real piece of action, a charge or an irresistible press
forward, on the field itself. Of a like suggestion, in a general way,
was it to me yesterday afternoon to have gone again to see my--already
"my"!--poor Belgian wounded at St. Bartholomew's; with whom it's quite a
balm to one's feelings to have established something of a helpful
relation, thanks to the power of freedom of speech, by which I mean use
of idiom, between us--and thanks again to one's so penetrating
impression of their stricken and bereft patience and mild fatalism. Not
one of those with whom I talked the last time had yet come by the
shadow of a clue or trace of any creature belonging to him, young wife
or child or parent or brother, in all the thick obscurity of their
scatterment; and once more I felt the tremendous force of such
convulsions as the now-going-on in wrenching and dislocating the
presupposable and rendering the actual monstrous of the hour, whatever
it is, all the suffering creature _can_ feel. Even more interesting, and
in a different way, naturally, was a further hour at St. B's with a
couple of wardsful of British wounded, just straight back, by
extraordinary good fortune, from the terrific fighting round about
Ypres, which is still going on, but from which they had been got away in
their condition, at once via Saint-Nazaire and Southampton; three or
four of whom, all of the Grenadier Guards, who seemed genuinely glad of
one's approach (not being for the time at all otherwise visited,) struck
me as quite ideal and _natural_ soldier-stuff of the easy, the bright
and instinctive, and above all the, in this country, probably quite
inexhaustible, kind. Those I mention were intelligent specimens of
course--one picked them out rather for their intelligent faces; but the
ease, as I say, the goodhumour, the gaiety and simplicity, without the
ghost of swagger, of their individual adaptability to their job, made an
impression of them about as satisfactory, so to speak, as one could
possibly desire it.... But this is all now--and you'll say it's enough!
Ever your affectionate old Uncle,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Hugh Walpole._

/#
     Mr. Walpole was at this time in Russia.
#/


/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.
November 21st, 1914.
*/

/*
Dearest Hugh,
*/

This is a great joy--your letter of November 12th has just come, to my
extreme delight, and I answer it, you see, within a very few hours. It
is by far the best letter you have ever written me, and I am touched and
interested by it more than I can say. Let me tell you at once that I
sent you that last thing in type-copy because of an anxious calculation
that such a form would help to secure its safe arrival. Your own scrap
was a signal of the probable non-arrival of anything that seemed in the
least to defy legibility; therefore I said to myself that what was
flagrantly and blatantly legible _would_ presumably reach you.... I had
better make use of this chance, however, to give you an inkling of _our_
affairs, such as they are, rather than indulge in mere surmises and
desires, fond and faithful though these be, about your own
eventualities. London is of course under all our stress very
interesting, to me deeply and infinitely moving--but on a basis and in
ways that make the life we have known here fade into grey mists of
insignificance. People "meet" a little, but very little, every social
habit and convention has broken down, save with a few vulgarians and
utter mistakers (mistakers, I mean, about the decency of things;) and
for myself, I confess, I find there are very few persons I care to
see--only those to whom and to whose state of feeling I am really
attached. Promiscuous chatter on the public situation and the gossip
thereanent of more or less wailing women in particular give unspeakably
on my nerves. Depths of sacred silence seem to me to prescribe
themselves in presence of the sanctities of action of those who, in
unthinkable conditions almost, are magnificently _doing_ the thing. Then
right and left are all the figures of mourning--though such proud erect
ones--over the blow that has come to them. _There_ the women are
admirable--the mothers and wives and sisters; the mothers in particular,
since it's so much the younger lives, the fine seed of the future, that
are offered and taken. The rate at which they are taken is
appalling--but then I think of France and Russia and even of Germany
herself, and the vision simply overwhelms and breaks the heart. "The
German dead, the German dead!" I above all say to myself--in such
hecatombs have _they_ been ruthlessly piled up by those who have driven
them, from behind, to their fate; and it for the moment almost makes me
forget Belgium--though when I _remember_ that disembowelled country my
heart is at once hardened to _every_ son of a Hun. Belgium we have
hugely and portentously with us; if never in the world was a nation so
driven forth, so on the other hand was one never so taken to another's
arms. And the Dutch have been nobly hospitable!...Immensely interesting
what you say of the sublime newness of spirit of the great Russian
people--of whom we are thinking here with the most confident admiration.
I met a striking specimen the other day who was oddly enough in the
Canadian contingent (he had been living two or three years in Canada and
had volunteered there;) and who was of a stature, complexion,
expression, and above all of a shining candour, which made him a kind of
army-corps in himself.... But goodnight, dearest Hugh. I sit here
writing late, in the now extraordinary London blackness of darkness and
(almost) tension of stillness. The alarms we have had here as yet come
to nothing. Please believe in the fond fidelity with which I think of
you. Oh for the day of reparation and reunion! I hope for you that you
_may_ have the great and terrible experience of Ambulance service at the
front. Ah how I pray you also _may_ receive this benediction from your
affectionate old

/*
H. J.
*/




_To Mrs. Wharton._

/#
     Mr. Walter Berry had just passed through London on his way back to
     Paris from a brief expedition to Berlin. The revived work which H.
     J. was now carrying forward was _The Sense of the Past_.
#/


/*
21 Carlyle Mansions, Cheyne Walk, S.W.
December 1st, 1914.
*/

/*
Dearest Edith,
*/

Walter offers me kindly to carry you my word, and I don't want him to go
empty-handed, though verily only the poor shrunken sediment of me is
practically left after the overwhelming and _écrasant_ effect of
listening to him on the subject of the transcendent high pitch of
Berlin. I kick myself for being so flattened out by it, and ask myself
moreover why I should feel it in any degree as a revelation, when it
consists really of nothing but what one has been constantly saying to
one's self--one's mind's eye perpetually blinking at it, as presumably
the case--all these weeks and weeks. It's the personal note of testimony
that has caused it to knock me up--what has permitted this being the
nature and degree of my unspeakable and abysmal sensibility where "our
cause" is concerned, and the fantastic force, the prodigious passion,
with which my affections are engaged in it. They grow more and more
so--and my soul is in the whole connection one huge sore ache. That
makes me dodge lurid lights when I ought doubtless but personally to
glare back at them--as under the effect of many of my impressions here I
frequently do--or almost! For the moment I am quite floored--but I
suppose I shall after a while pick myself up. I dare say, for that
matter, that I am down pretty often--for I find I am constantly picking
myself up. So even this time I don't really despair. About Belgium
Walter was so admirably and unspeakably interesting--if the word be not
mean for the scale of such tragedy--which you'll have from him all for
yourself. If I don't call his Berlin simply interesting and have done
with it, that's because the very faculty of attention is so overstrained
by it as to hurt. This takes you all my love. I have got back to trying
to work--on one of three books begun and abandoned--at the end of some
"30,000 words"--15 years ago, and fished out of the depths of an old
drawer at Lamb House (I sent Miss Bosanquet down to hunt it up) as
perhaps offering a certain defiance of subject to the law by which most
things now perish in the public blight. This does seem to kind of
intrinsically resist--and I have hopes. But I must rally now before
getting back to it. So pray for me that I do, and invite dear Walter to
Kneel by my side and believe me your faithfully fond

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Mrs. T. S. Perry._


_Dictated._

/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.
December 11th, 1914.
*/

/*
Dear and so sympathetic Lilla!
*/

I have been these many, by which I mean too many, days in receipt of
your brave letter and impassioned sonnet--a combination that has done
me, I assure you, no end of good. I so ache and yearn, here more or less
on the spot, with the force of my interest in our public situation, I
feel myself in short such a glowing and flaring firebrand, that I can't
have enough of the blest article you supply, my standard of what
constitutes enough being so high!... Your sonnet strikes me as very well
made--which all sonnets from "female" pens are not; and since you invoke
American association with us you do the fine thing in invoking it up to
the hilt. Of course you can all do us most good by simply feeling and
uttering as the best of you do--there having come in my way several
copious pronouncements by the American Press than which it has seemed to
me there could have been nothing better in the way of perfect
understanding and happy expression. I have said to myself in presence of
some of them "Oh blest and wondrous the miracle; the force of events,
the light of our Cause, is absolutely inspiring the newspaper tone over
there with the last thing one ever expected it to have, style and the
weight of style; so that _all_ the good things are literally on our side
at once!"

It's delightful to me to hear of your local knitting and sewing
circle--it quite goes to my heart in fact to catch your echo of the
brave click of the needles at gentle Hancock! They click under my own
mild roof from morning to night, so that I can't quite say why I don't
find my soup flavoured with khaki wool or my napkin inadvertently
replaced by a large grey sock. But the great thing is that it's really a
pity you are not here for participation in the fine old English thrill
and throb of all that goes forward simply from day to day and that makes
the common texture of our life: you would generously abound in the sense
of it, I feel, and be grateful for it as a kind of invaluable, a really
cherishable, "race" experience. One wouldn't have to explain anything to
you--you would take it all down in a gulp, the kind of gulp in which one
has to indulge to keep from breaking down under the positive pang of
comprehension and emotion. Two afternoons ago I caught that gulp, twice
over, in the very act--while listening to that dear and affable Emile
Boutroux make an exquisite philosophic address to the British Academy,
which he had come over for the purpose of, and then hearing the less
consummate, yet sturdily sensitive and expressive Lord Chancellor
(Haldane) utter to him, in return, the thanks of the select and intense
auditory and their sense of the beautiful and wonderful and
unprecedented unison of nations that the occasion symbolised and
celebrated. In the quietest way in the world Boutroux just escaped
"breaking down" in his preliminary reference to what this meant and how
he felt, and just so the good Haldane grazed the same almost inevitable
accident in speaking for _us_, all us present and the whole public
consciousness, when he addressed the lecturer afterwards. What was so
moving was its being so utterly unrehearsed and immediate--its coming,
on one side and the other, so of itself, and being a sort of thing that
hasn't since God knows when, if ever, found itself taking place between
nation and nation. I kind of wish that the U.S.A. were not (though of
necessity, I admit) so absent from this feast of friendship; it figures
for me as such an extraordinary luxury that the whirligig of time has
turned up for us such an intimacy of association with France and that
France so exquisitely responds to it. I quite tasted of the quality of
this last fact two nights ago when an English officer, a most sane and
acute middle-aged Colonel, dined with me and another friend, and gave us
a real vision of what the presence of the British forces in the field
now means for the so extraordinarily intelligent and responsive French,
and what a really unprecedented relation (I do wish to goodness _we_
were in it!) between a pair of fraternising and reciprocating people it
represents. The truth is of course that the British participation has
been extraordinarily, quite miraculously, effective and sustaining, has
had in it a _quality_ of reinforcement out of proportion to its numbers,
though these are steadily growing, and that all the intelligence of the
wonderful France simply floods the case with appreciation and
fraternity; these things shown in the charming way in which the French
most of all _can_ show the like under full inspiration. Yes, it's an
association that I do permit myself at wanton moments to wish that _we_,
in our high worthiness to be of it, weren't so out of! But I mustn't, my
dear Lilla, go maundering on. Intercede with Thomas to the effect of his
writing me some thoroughly, some intensely and immensely participating
word, for the further refreshment of my soul. It is refreshed here, as
well as ravaged, oh at times so ravaged: by the general sense of what is
maturing and multiplying, steadily multiplying, on behalf of the
Allies--out of the immediate circle of whose effectively stored and
steadily expanding energies we reach over to a slightly bedimmed but
inexpressible Russia with a deep-felt sense that before we have all
done with it together she is going somehow to emerge as the most
interesting, the most original and the most potent of us all. Let Thomas
take to himself from me that so I engage on behalf of his chosen people!
Yours and his and the Daughter's all intimately and faithfully,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Edmund Gosse._


/*
21 Carlyle Mansions, Cheyne Walk, S.W.
December 17th, 1914.
*/

/*
My dear Gosse,
*/

This is a scratch of postscript to my note this evening posted to
you--prompted by the consciousness of not having therein made a word of
reply to your question as to what I "think of things." The recovered
pressure of that question makes me somehow positively _want_ to say that
(I think) I don't "think" of them at all--though I try to; that I only
feel, and feel, and _toujours_ feel about them unspeakably, and about
nothing else whatever--feeling so in Wordsworth's terms of exaltations,
agonies and loves, and (our) unconquerable mind. Yes, I kind of make out
withal that through our insistence an increasing purpose runs, and that
one's vision of its final effect (though only with the aid of _time_)
grows less and less dim, so that one seems to find at moments it's
almost sharp! And meanwhile what a purely suicidal record for themselves
the business of yesterday--the women and children (and babes in arms)
slaughtered at Scarborough and Whitby, with their turning and fleeing as
soon as ever they had killed enough for the moment. Oh, I do "think"
enough to believe in retribution for _that_. So I've kind of answered
you.

/*
Ever yours,

HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Miss Grace Norton._

/#
     This follows on the letter to Miss Norton of Oct. 16, 1914, dealing
     with the work in France of her nephew, Richard Norton.
#/


_Dictated._

/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.
January 1st, 1915.
*/

/*
Dearest Grace!
*/

I waste no time in explaining again how reduced I am to the use of this
machinery by the absolute physical effect on my poor old organism of the
huge tension and oppression of our conditions here--to say nothing of
the moral effect, with which the other is of course intensely mixed. I
can tell you better thus moreover than by any weaker art what huge
satisfaction I had yesterday in an hour or two of Richard's company; he
having generously found time to lunch with me during two or three days
that he is snatching away from the Front, under urgency of business. I
gathered from him that you hear from him with a certain frequency and
perhaps some fulness--I know it's always his desire that you shall; but
even so you perhaps scarce take in how "perfectly splendid" he
is--though even if you in a manner do I want to put it on record to you,
for myself, that I find him unmitigatedly magnificent. It's impossible
for me to overstate my impression of his intelligent force, his energy
and lucidity, his gallantry and resolution, or of the success the
unswerving application of these things is making for him and for his
enterprise. Not that I should speak as if he and that were different
matters--he is the enterprise, and that, on its side, is his very self;
and in fine it is a tremendous tonic--among a good many tonics that we
have indeed, thank goodness!--to get the sense of his richly beneficent
activity. He seemed extremely well and "fit," and suffered me to ply him
with all the questions that one's constant longing here for a nearer
view, combined with a kind of shrinking terror of it, given all the
misery the greatest nearness seems to reveal, makes one restlessly keep
up. What he has probably told you, with emphasis, by letter, is the
generalisation most sadly forced upon him--the comparative
supportability of the fact of the wounded and the sick beside the
desolating view of the ravaged refugees. He can help the former much
more than the latter, and the ability to do his special job with success
is more or less sustaining and rewarding; but the sight of the wretched
people with their villages and homes and resources utterly annihilated,
and they simply staring at the blackness of their ruin, with the very
clothes on their backs scarce left to them, is clearly something that
would quite break the heart if one could afford to let it. If he isn't
able to give you the detail of much of _that_ tragedy, so much the
better for you--save indeed for your thereby losing too some examples of
how he succeeds in occasional mitigations _quand même_, thanks to the
positive, the quite blest, ferocity of his passion not to fail of any
service he can with the least conceivability render. He was most
interesting, he was altogether admirable, as to his attitude in the
matter of going _outside_ of the strict job of carrying the military
sick and wounded, and them only, as the ancient "Geneva Conventions"
confine a Red Cross Ambulance to doing. There has been some perfunctory
protest, not long since, on the part of some blank agent of that (Red
Cross) body, in relation to his picking up stricken and helpless
civilians and seeing them as far as possible on their way to some
desperate refuge or relief; whereupon he had given this critic full in
the face the whole philosophy of his proceedings and intentions,
letting the personage know that when the Germans ruthlessly broke every
Geneva Convention by attempting to shell him and his cars and his
wounded whenever they could spy a chance, he was absolutely for doing in
mercy and assistance what they do in their dire brutality, and might be
depended upon to convey not only every suffering civilian but any armed
and trudging soldiers whom a blest chance might offer him. His
remonstrant visitor remained blank and speechless, but at the same time
duly impressed or even floored, and Dick will have, I think, so far as
any further or more serious protest is concerned, an absolutely free
hand. The Germans have violated with the last cynicism both the letter
and the spirit of every agreement they ever signed, and it's little
enough that the poor retaliation left us, not that "in kind," which I
think we may describe ourselves as despising, but that in mere
reparation of their ravage and mere scrappy aid to ourselves, should be
compassed by us when we _can_ compass it.... Richard told me yesterday
that the aspect of London struck him as having undergone a great change
since his last rush over--in the sense of the greater flagrancy of the
pressure of the War; and one feels that perfectly on the spot and
without having to go away and come back for it. There corresponds with
it doubtless a much tighter screw-up of the whole public consciousness,
worked upon by all kinds of phenomena that are very penetrating here,
but that doubtless are reduced to some vagueness as reported to you
across the sea--when reported at all, as most of them can't be. Goodbye
at any rate for this hour. What I most wanted to give you was the strong
side-wind and conveyed virtue of Dick's visit. I hope you are seeing
rather more than less of Alice and Peggy, to whom I succeed in writing
pretty often--and perhaps things that if repeated to you, as I trust
they sometimes are, help you to some patient allowance for your
tremendously attached old friend,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Mrs. Dacre Vincent._

/#
     This refers to the loss of a fine old mulberry-tree that had stood
     on the lawn at Lamb House.
#/


/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.
January 6th, 1915.
*/

/*
My dear Margaret,
*/

It has been delightful to me to hear from you even on so sorry a subject
as my poor old prostrated tree; which it was most kind of you to go and
take a pitying look at. He might have gone on for some time, I think, in
the absence of an _inordinate_ gale--but once the fury of the tempest
really descended he was bound to give way, because his poor old heart
was dead, his immense old trunk hollow. He had no power to resist left
when the south-wester caught him by his vast _crinière_ and simply
twisted his head round and round. It's very sad, for he was the making
of the garden--he was _it_ in person; and now I feel for the time as if
I didn't care what becomes of it--my interest wholly collapses. But what
a folly to talk of _that_ prostration, among all the prostrations that
surround us! One hears of them here on every side--and they represent
(of course I am speaking of the innumerable splendid young men, fallen
in their flower) the crushingly black side of all the horrible business,
the irreparable dead loss of what is most precious, the inestimable seed
of the future. The air is full of the sense of all _that_
dreadfulness--the echoes forever in one's ears. Still, I haven't wanted
to wail to you--and don't write you for that. London isn't cheerful, but
vast and dark and damp and very visibly _depleted_ (as well may be!) and
yet is also in a sense uplifting and reassuring, such an impression does
one get here after all of the enormous resources of this empire. I mean
that the _reminders_ at every turn are so great. I see a few
people--quite as many as I can do with; for I find I can't do with
miscellaneous chatter or make a single new acquaintance--look at a
solitary new face save that of the wounded soldiers in hospital, whom I
see something of and find of a great and touching interest. Yet the
general conditions of town I find the only ones I can do with now, and I
am more glad than I can say to think of Mrs. Lloyd and her daughters
supplanting me, at their ease, at dear old L.H. I rejoice to hear from
you of Beau's fine outlook and I send him my aged blessing--as I do to
his Father, who must take good comfort of him. I am afraid on the other
hand that all these diluvian and otherwise devastated days haven't
contributed to the gaiety (I won't say of "nations"--what will have
become, forever, of that? but) of golfers pure and simple. I wonder
about you much, and very tenderly, and wish you weren't so far, or my
agility so extinct. I find I think with dismay--positive terror--of a
station or a train--more than once or twice a year. Bitter moreover the
thought to me that you never seem now in the way of coming up....

Goodnight, dear Margaret. Yours all faithfully,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To the Hon. Evan Charteris._


/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.
Jan. 22, 1915.
*/

/*
My dear Evan,
*/

I am more deeply moved than I can say by the receipt of your so
admirably vivid and interesting letter.... I envy you intensely your
opportunity to apply _that_ [spirit of observation] in these immense
historic conditions and thus to have had a hand of your own in the most
prodigious affirmation of the energy and ingenuity of man ("however
misplaced"!) that surely can ever have been in the world. For God's sake
go on taking as many notes of it as you possibly can, and believe with
what grateful piety I shall want to go over your treasure with you when
you finally bring it home. Such impressions as you must get, such
incalculable things as you must see, such unutterable ones as you must
feel! Well, keep it all up, and above all keep up that same blest
confidence in my fond appreciation. Wonderful your account of that night
visit to the trenches and giving me more of the sense and the smell and
the fantastic grimness, the general ordered and methodised horror, than
anything else whatever that has pretended to enlighten us. With infinite
interest do I take in what you say of the rapidity with which the
inside-out-ness of your conditions becomes the matter of course and the
platitudinous--which I take partly to result from the tremendous
collectivity of the case, doesn't it? the fact of the wholeness of the
stress and strain or intimate fusion, as in a common pot, of all
exposures, all resistances, all the queerness and all the muchness! But
I mustn't seem to put too interrogatively my poor groping speculations.
Only wait to correct my mistakes in some better future, and I shall
understand you down to the ground. We add day to day here as
consciously, or labouringly, as you are doing, no doubt, on your
side--it's in fact like lifting every 24 hours, just now, a very
dismally dead weight and setting it on top of a pile of such others,
already stacked, which promises endlessly to grow--so that the mere
reaching up adds all the while to the beastly effort. London is
_grey_--in moral tone; and even the Zeppelin bombs of last night at
Yarmouth do little to make it flush. What a pitiful horror indeed must
that Ypres desolation and desecration be--a baseness of demonism. I
find, thank God, that under your image of that I at least _can_ flush.
It so happens that I dine to-morrow (23d) with John Sargent, or rather I
mean lunch, and I shall take for granted your leave to read him your
letter. I bless you again for it, and am yours all faithfully,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Compton Mackenzie._


_Dictated._

/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.
January 23rd, 1915.
*/

/*
My dear Monty,
*/

I am acknowledging your so interesting letter at once; because I find
that under the effect of all our conditions here I can't answer for any
postal fluency, however reduced in quality or quantity, at an indefinite
future time. My fluency of the moment even, such as it is, has to take
the present mechanic form; but here goes, at any rate, to the extent of
my having rejoiced to hear from you, not of much brightness though your
news may be. I tenderly condole and participate with you on your having
been again flung into bed. Truly the haul on your courage has to keep on
being enormous--and I applaud to the echo the wonderful way that virtue
in you appears to meet it. You strike me as leading verily the heroic
life at a pitch nowhere and by nobody surpassed--even though our whole
scene bristles all over with such grand examples of it. Since you are up
and at work again may that at least go bravely on--while I marvel again,
according to my wont, at your still finding it possible in conditions
that I fear would be for me dismally "inhibitive." I bless your new
book, even if you didn't in our last talk leave me with much grasp of
what it is to be "about." In presence of any suchlike intention I find I
want a subject to be able quite definitely to state and declare
itself--_as_ a subject; and when the thing is communicated to me (in
advance) in the form of So-and-So's doing this, that or the other, or
Something-else's "happening" and so on, I kind of yearn for the
expressible idea or motive, what the thing is to be done _for_, to have
been presented to me; which you may say perhaps is asking a good deal. I
don't think so, if any cognisance at all is vouchsafed one; it is the
only thing I in the least care to ask. What the author shall do with his
idea I am quite ready to wait for, but am meanwhile in no relation to
the work at all unless that basis has been provided. Console yourself,
however: dear great George Meredith once began to express to me what a
novel he had just started ("One of Our Conquerors") was to be about by
no other art than by simply naming to me the half-dozen occurrences,
such as they were, that occupied the pages he had already written; so
that I remained, I felt, quite without an answer to my respectful
inquiry--which he had all the time the very attitude of kindly
encouraging and rewarding!

But why do I make these restrictive and invidious observations? I bless
your book, and the author's fine hand and brain, whatever it may consist
of; and I bend with interest over your remarks about poor speculating
and squirming Italy's desperate dilemma. The infusion of that further
horror of local devastation and anguish is too sickening for words--I
have been able only to avert my face from it; as, if I were nearer, I
fear I should but wrap my head in my mantle and give up altogether. The
truth is however that the Italian case affects me as on the whole rather
_ugly_--failing to see, as one does, their _casus belli_, and having to
see, as one also does, that they must hunt up one to give them any sort
of countenance at all. I should--


_January 25th._

I had alas to break off two days ago, having been at that very moment
flung into bed, as I am occasionally liable to [be], somewhat like
yourself; though happily not in the prolonged way. I am up this morning
again--though still in rather semi-sickly fashion; but trying to collect
my wits afresh as to what I was going to say about Italy. However, I had
perhaps better not say it--as I take, I rather fear, a more detached
view of her attitude than I see that, on the spot, you can easily do. By
which I mean that I don't much make out how, as regards the two nations
with whom [she is in] alliance (originally so unnatural, alas, in the
matter of Austria!), she can act in a fashion, any fashion, regardable
as _straight_. I always hated her patching up a friendly relation with
Austria, and thereby with Germany, as against France and this country;
and now what she publishes is that it _was_ good enough for her so long
as there was nothing to be got otherwise. If there's anything to be got
(by any _other_ alliance) she will go in for that; but she thus gives
herself away, as to all her recent past, a bit painfully, doesn't one
feel?--and will do so especially if what she has in mind is to cut in
on Turkey and so get ahead, for benefit or booty or whatever, of her
very own allies. However, I mustn't speak as if we and ours shouldn't be
glad of her help, whatever that help is susceptible of amounting to. The
situation is one for not looking a gift-horse in the mouth--which only
proves, alas, how _many_ hideous and horrible [aspects] such situations
have. Personally, I don't see how she can make up her mind not, in spite
of all temptations, to remain as still as a mouse. Isn't it rather
luridly borne in upon her that the Germans have only to make up their
minds ruthlessly to violate Switzerland in order, as they say, "to be at
Milan, by the Simplon, the St. Gotthard or whatever, in just ten hours"?
Ugh!--let me not talk of such abominations: I don't know why I pretend
to it or attempt it. I too am trying (I don't know whether I told you)
to bury my nose in the doing of something daily; and am finding that,
however little I manage on any given occasion, even that little sustains
and inflames and rewards me. I lose myself thus in the mystery of what
"art" can do for one, even with every blest thing against it. And why it
_should_ and how it does and what it means--that is "the funny thing"!
However, as I just said, one mustn't look a gift-horse etc. So don't
yourself so scrutinise _this_ poor animal, but believe me yours all
faithfully,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Miss Elizabeth Norton._

/#
     The "pamphlet" was his appeal on behalf of the American Volunteer
     Motor-Ambulance, included in _Within the Rim_.
#/


/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.
Jan. 25th, 1915.
*/

/*
Dearest Lily,
*/

It has been of the greatest interest, it has been delightful, to me to
receive to-night your so generous and informing letter. The poor little
pamphlet for which you "thank" me is a helpless and empty thing--for
which I should blush were not the condition of its production so legibly
stamped upon it. You can't say things unless you have been out there to
learn them, and _if_ you have been out there to learn them you can say
them less than ever. With all but utterly nothing to go upon I had to
make my remarks practically _of_ nothing, and that the effect of them
can only be nil on a subscribing public which wants constant and
particular news of the undertakings it has been asked to believe in once
for all, I can but too readily believe. The case seems different here--I
mean on this side of the sea--where scores and scores of such like corps
are in operation in France--the number of ambulance-cars is many, many
thousand, on all the long line--without its becoming necessary for them
that their work should be publicly chronicled. I think the greater
nearness--here--the strange and sinister nearness--makes much of the
difference; various facts are conveyed by personal--unpublished--report,
and these sufficiently serve the purpose. What seems clear, at all
events, is that there _is_ no devisable means for keeping the enterprise
in touch with American sympathy, and I sadly note therefore what you
tell me of the inevitable and not distant end. The aid rendered strikes
me as having been of the handsomest--as is splendidly the case with all
the aid America is rendering, in her own large-handed and full-handed
way; of which you tell me such fine interesting things from your own
experience. It makes you all seem one vast and prodigious workshop
_with_ us--for the resources and the energy of production and creation
and devotion here are of course beyond estimation. I imagine indeed
that, given your more limited relation to the War, your resources in
money are more remarkable--even though here (by which I mean in England,
for the whole case is I believe more hampered in France) the way the
myriad calls and demands are endlessly met and met is prodigious enough.
It does my heart good that you should express yourself as you do--though
how could you do anything else?--on behalf of the simply sacred cause,
as I feel it, of the Allies; for here at least one needs to feel it so
to bear up under the close pressure of all that is so hideous and
horrible in what has been let loose upon us. Much of the time one feels
that one simply can't--the heart-breaking aspect, the destruction of
such masses, on such a scale, of the magnificent young life that was to
have been productive and prolific, bears down any faith, any patience,
all argument and all hope. I can look at the woe of the bereft, the
parents, the mothers and wives, and take it comparatively for
granted--that is not care for what they individually suffer (as they
seem indifferent themselves, both here and in France, in an
extraordinarily noble way.) But the dead loss of such ranks upon ranks
of the finest young human material--of life--that is an abyss into which
one can simply gaze appalled. And as if that were not enough I find
myself sickened to the very soul by the apparent _sense_ of the _louche_
and sinister figure of Mr. Woodrow Wilson, who seems to be _aware_ of
nothing but the various ingenious ways in which it is open to him to
make difficulties for us. I may not read him right, but most of my
correspondents at home appear to, and they minister to my dread of him
and the meanness of his note as it breaks into all this heroic air.

But I am writing you in the key of _mere_ lamentation--which I didn't
mean to do. Strange as it may seem, there are times when I am much
uplifted--when what _may_ come out of it all seems almost worth it. And
then the black nightmare holds the field again--and in fact one proceeds
almost wholly by those restless alternations. They consume one's vital
substance, but one will perhaps wear them out first. It touches me
deeply that you should speak tenderly of dear old London, for which my
own affection in these months _s'est accrue_ a thousandfold--just as the
same has taken place in my attachment for all these so very
preponderantly decent and solid people. The race _is_ worth fighting
for, immensely--in fact I don't know any other for whom it can so much
be said.... Well, go on working and feeling and believing for me, dear
Lily, and God uphold your right arm and carry far your voice. Think of
me too as your poor old aching and yet not altogether collapsing, your
in fact quite clinging,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Hugh Walpole._

/#
     Mr. Walpole was now serving with the Red Cross on the Russian
     front.
#/


/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.
February 14th, 1915.
*/

/*
Dearest Hugh,
*/

"When you write," you say, and when _do_ I write but just exactly an
hour after your letter of this evening, that of February 1st, a
fortnight ago to a day, has come to hand? I delight in having got it,
and find it no less interesting than genial--bristling with fine
realities. Much as it tells me, indeed, I could have done with still
more; but that is of course always the case at such a time as this, and
amid such wonderments and yearnings; and I make gratefully the most of
what there is. The basis, the connection, the mode of employment on, and
in, and under which you "go off," for instance, are matters that leave
me scratching my head and exhaling long and sad sighs--but as those two
things are what I am at in these days most of my time I don't bring them
home _most_ criminally to you. Only I am moved to beseech you this time
not to throw yourself into the thick of military operations amid which
your want of even the minimum of proper eyesight apparently may devote
you to destruction, more or less--after the manner of the blind _quart
d'heure_ described to me in your letter previous to this one. I am sorry
the black homesickness so feeds upon you amid your terrific paradoxical
friends, the sport alike of their bodies and their souls, of whom your
account is admirably vivid; but I well conceive your state, which has my
tenderest sympathy--that nostalgic ache at its worst being the
invocation of the very devil of devils. Don't let it break the spell of
your purpose of learning Russian, of really mastering it--though even
while I say this I rather wince at your telling me that you incline not
to return to England till September next. I don't put that regret on the
score of my loss of the sight of you till then--that gives the sort of
personal turn to the matter that we are all ashamed together of giving
to any matter now. But the being and the having been in England--or in
France, which is now so much the same thing--during at least a part of
this unspeakable year affects me as something you are not unlikely to be
sorry to have missed; there attaches to it--to the being here--something
so sovereign and so initiatory in the way of a British experience. I
mean that it's as if you wouldn't have had the full general British
experience without it, and that this may be a pity for you as a painter
of British phenomena--for I don't suppose you think of reproducing
_only_ Russian for the rest of your shining days. However, I hasten to
add that I feel the very greatest aversion to intermeddlingly advising
you--your completing your year in Russia all depends on what you _do_
with the precious time. You may bring home fruits by which you will be
wholly justified. Address yourself indeed to doing that and putting it
absolutely through--and I will, for my part, back you up unlimitedly.
Only, bring your sheaves with you, and gather in a golden bundle of the
same. I detest, myself, the fine old British horror--as it has
flourished at least up to now, when in respect to the great matter
that's upon us the fashion has so much changed--of doing anything
consistently and seriously. So if you should draw out your absence I
shall believe in your reasons. Meanwhile I am myself of the most flaming
British complexion--the whole thing is to me an unspeakably intimate
experience--if it isn't abject to apply such a term when one hasn't had
one's precious _person_ straight up against the facts. I have only had
my poor old mind and imagination--but as one _can_ have them here; and I
live partly in dark abysses and partly in high and, I think, noble
elations. But how, at my age and in my conditions, I could have
beautifully done without it! I resist more or less--since you ask me to
tell you how I "am"; I resist and go on from day to day because I want
to and the horrible interest is too great not to. But that same is
adding the years in great shovel-fulls to our poor old lives (those at
least of my generation:) so don't be too long away after all if you want
ever to see me again. I have in a manner got back to work--after a black
interregnum; and find it a refuge and a prop--but the conditions make it
difficult, exceedingly, almost insuperably, _I_ find, in a sense far
other than the mere distressing and depressing. The subject-matter of
one's effort has become _itself_ utterly treacherous and false--its
relation to reality utterly given away and smashed. Reality is a world
that was to be capable of _this_--and how represent that horrific
capability, _historically_ latent, historically ahead of it? How on the
other hand _not_ represent it either--without putting into play mere
fiddlesticks?

I had to break off my letter last night from excess of lateness, and now
I see I misdated it. Tonight is the 15th, the p.m. of a cold grey Sunday
such as we find wintry here, in our innocence of your ferocities of
climate; to which in your place I should speedily succumb. That buried
beneath the polar blizzard and the howling homesick snowdrift you
_don't_ utterly give way is, I think, a proof of very superior resources
and of your being reserved for a big future.... Goodnight, however, now
really, dearest Hugh. I follow your adventure with all the affectionate
solicitude of your all-faithful old

/*
H. J.
*/




_To Mrs. Henry Cabot Lodge._


/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.
February 16th, 1915.
*/

/*
My dear Mrs. Lodge,
*/

It is indeed very horrible that having had the kindest of little letters
from you ever so long ago (I won't remind you how long--you may have
magnanimously forgotten it a little) I am thanking you for it only at
this late day. Explanations are vain things, and yet if I throw myself
on the biggest explanation that ever was in the world there may be
something in it.... Fortunately the interest and the sympathy grow (if
things that start at the superlative degree _can_ grow), and I never am
sick with all the monstrosity of it but I become after a bit almost well
with all the virtue and the decency. I try to live in the admiring
contemplation of that as much as possible--and I thought I already knew
how deeply attached I am to this remarkable country and to the character
of its people. I find I haven't known until now the real degree of my
attachment--which I try to show--that is to apply--the intensity of in
small and futile ways. To-day for instance I have been taking to my
dentist a convalesced soldier--a mere sapper of the R.E.--whom I fished
out of a hospital; yesterday I went to the Stores to send
"food-chocolate" to my cook's nephew at the front, Driver Bisset of the
Artillery; and at the moment I write I am putting up for the night a
young ex-postman from Rye who has come up to pass the doctor tomorrow
for the Naval Brigade. These things, as I write them, make me almost
feel that I do push before you the inevitability of my silence. But they
don't mean, please, that I am not living very intensively, at the same
time, with you all at Washington--where I fondly suppose you all to
entertain sentiments, the Senator and yourself, Constance and that
admirable Gussy, into which I may enter with the last freedom. I won't
go into the particulars of my sympathy--or at least into the particulars
of what it imputes to you: but I have a general sweet confidence, a kind
of wealth of divination.

London is of course not gay (thank the Lord;) but I wouldn't for the
world not be here--there are impressions under which I feel it a kind of
uplifting privilege. The situation doesn't make me gregarious--but on
the contrary very fastidious about the people I care to see. I know
exactly those I don't, but never have I taken more kindly to those I
do--and with _them_ intercourse has a fine intimacy that is beyond
anything of the past. But we are very mature--and that is part of the
harmony--the young and the youngish are _all_ away getting killed, so
far as they are males; and so far as they are females, wives and
fiancées and sisters, they are occupied with being simply beyond praise.
The mothers are pure Roman and it's all tremendously becoming to every
one. There are really no fiancées by the way--the young men get home for
three days and are married--then off into the absolute Hell of it again.
But good-night now. It was truly exquisite of you to write to me. Do
feel, and tell Cabot that I take the liberty of asking _him_ to feel,
how thoroughly I count on all your house. It's a luxury for me to _know_
how I can on Constance. Yours, dear Mrs. Lodge, ever and ever so
faithfully,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Mrs. William James._

/#
     H. J.'s eldest nephew was at this time occupied with relief work in
     Belgium.
#/


/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.
Feb. 20th, 1915.
*/

/*
Dearest Alice,
*/

...Of course our great (family) public fact is Harry's continuously
inscrutable and unseizable activity here. "Here" I say, without knowing
in the least where he now is--and the torment of his spending all this
time on this side of the sea, and of one's utter loss of him in
_consequence_, is really quite dreadful.... England is splendid,
undisturbed and undismayed by the savage fury and the roaring mad-bull
"policy" of Germany's mine-and-torpedo practice against all the nations
of the earth, or rather of the sea--though of course there will be a
certain number of disasters, and it will probably be on neutrals that
most of these will fall.

Feb. 22nd, p.m. I had to break this off two nights ago and since then
that remark has been signally confirmed--three neutral ships have been
sunk by mines and torpedoes, and one of these we learn this a.m. is an
American cargo-boat. I don't suppose anything particular will "happen"
for you all with Germany because of this incident alone (the crew were
saved;) yet it can hardly improve relations, and she is sure to repeat
the injury in some form, promptly, and then the fat will be on the fire.
Mr. Roosevelt is far from being dear to me, but I can't _not_ agree with
his contention that the U.S.'s sitting down in meekness and silence
under the German repudiation of every engagement she solemnly took with
us, as the initiatory power in the Hague convention, constitutes an
unspeakable precedent, and makes us a deplorable figure.

Meanwhile I find it a real uplifting privilege to live in an air so
unterrorized as that of this country, and to feel what confidence we
insuperably feel in the big _sea-genius_, let alone the huge
sea-resources, of this people. It is a great experience. I mean the
whole process of life here is now--even if it does so abound in tragedy
and pity, such as one can often scarcely face. But there is too much of
all that to say--and all I intended was to remark that while Germany
roars and runs amuck the new armies now at last ready are being oh so
quietly transported across the diabolised Channel. The quiet and the
steady going here, amid the German vociferation, is of itself an
enormous--I was going to say pleasure. We have just heard from Burgess
of the arrival of his regiment at Havre--they left the Tower of London
but a few days ago.... I go to-morrow to the Protheros to help them with
tea-ing a party of convalescent soldiers from hospital--Mrs. J. G.
Butcher, like thousands, or at least hundreds, of other people, sends
her car on certain afternoons of the week to different hospitals for
four of the bettering patients--or as many as will go into it--and they
are conveyed either to her house or to some other arranged with. I have
"met" sets of them thus several times--the "right people" are wanted for
them, and nothing can be more interesting and admirable and verily
charming than I mostly find them. The last time the Protheros had, by
Mrs. Butcher's car, wounded Belgians--but to-morrow it is to be British,
whom I on the whole prefer, though the Belgians are more _gravely_
pathetic. The difficulty about them is that they are so apt to know only
Flemish and understand almost no French--save as one of them, always
included for the purpose, can interpret. I had to-day to luncheon a
most decent and appreciative little sapper in the Engineers, whom I
originally found in hospital and whose teeth I have been having done up
for him--at very reduced military rates! There is nothing one isn't
eager to do for them, and their gratitude for small mercies, excellent
stuff as they are, almost wrings the heart. _This_ obscure hero (a great
athlete in the _running_ line) is completely well again and goes in a
day or two back to the Front; but oh how they don't like the hellishness
of it (_that_ is beyond all conception,) and oh how they don't let this
make any difference! Tremendously will the "people" by this war--I mean
by their patience of it and in it--have made good their place in the
sun; though even as one says that one recognizes still more how the
"upper classes" in this country and the others have poured themselves
unstintedly out. The way "society" at large, in England, has
magnificently played up, will have given it, I think it will be found, a
new lease of life. However, society, in wars, always does play up--and
it is by them, and for them, that the same are mostly made....

Feb. 23rd. Again I had to go to bed, but it's all right and my letter
wouldn't in any case have gone to you till to-morrow's New York post.
Meanwhile not much has happened, thank heaven, save that I went to tea
with little Fanny P. and her five convalescents, and that it was a very
successful affair.... We plied them with edibles and torrents of the
drinkable and they expanded, as always, and became interesting and
moving, in the warmth of civilization and sympathy. Those I had on
either side of me at table were men of the old Army--I mean who had been
through the Boer War, and were therefore nigh upon forty, and
proportionately more _soldatesques_; but there is nothing, ever, that
one wouldn't do for any one of them; they become at once such children
of history, such creatures of distinction....

/*
Ever your affectionate

HENRY.
*/




_To Mrs. Wharton._

/#
     Mrs. Wharton, writing to describe a journey she had made along part
     of the French front, had mentioned that a staff-officer at Ste.
     Menehould had read some of her books, and had shown his
     appreciation by facilitating her visit to Verdun.
#/


/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.
March 5th, 1915.
*/

/*
Dearest Edith,
*/

How can I welcome and applaud enough your splendid thrilling letter--in
which, though it gives me your whole spectacle and impression as
unspeakably portentous, I find you somehow of the very same heroic
_taille_ of whatever it was that gave the rest at the monstrous maximum.
I unutterably envy you these sights and suffered assaults of the
_maxima_--condemned as I am by doddering age and "mean" infirmity to the
poor mesquins _minima_, when really to find myself in closer touch would
so fearfully interest and inspire and overwhelm me (as one wants to be
overwhelmed.) However, since my ignoble portion is what it is, the next
best thing is to heap you on the altar of sacrifice and gloat over
_your_ overwhelmedness and demand of you to serve me still more and more
of it. On this I even insist now that I have tasted of your state and
your substance--for your impression is rendered in a degree so vivid and
touching that it all (especially those vespers in the church with the
tragic beds in the aisles) wrings tears from my aged eyes. What a hungry
_luxury_ to be able to come back with things and give them then and
there straight into the aching voids: do it, _do_ it, my blest Edith,
for all you're worth: rather, rather--"sauvez, sauvez la France!" Ah, je
la sauverais bien, moi, if I hadn't been ruined myself too soon!... Ce
que c'est for you, evidently, to find yourself in these adventures, like
Ouida, "the favourite reading of the military." Well, as I say, do keep
in touch with your public! I stupidly forgot to tell Frederick to tell
you not to dream of returning me those £6. 0. 0 (all he would take,) but
to regard them as the contribution I was really then in the very nick of
sending to your Belges! So I _wired_ you a day or two ago to that
effect, after too much wool-gathering, and to anticipate absolutely any
restitution. It made it so _easy_ a sending. Well then à bientôt--Oliver
shamelessly (not asks, but) _howls_ for more. Yours all devotedlier than
ever,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To the Hon. Evan Charteris._


/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.
March 13th, 1915.
*/

/*
My dear Evan,
*/

Your letter is of such interest and beauty that I must thank you for it,
at once. Little idea can you have of how the sense of your whereabouts,
your visions, impressions and contacts, thrills me and makes me wonder,
enriches and excites my poor little private life.... In short you affect
me as gulping down great mugfuls of experience, while I am sipping that
compound out of a liqueur-glass not a quarter full. The only thing I can
say to myself is that I can live too, thank God, by my friends'
experience, when I hang about them in imagination, as you must take it
from me that I do about you. You help me greatly to do so with your
account of the soupless return of hospitality to your kind French
harbourers that you had been bringing-off--and this in particular by
your mention of the admirable aspects they, and all who around you are
like them, present to your intelligent English eyes. I rejoice in all
expressions and testimonies about the French, wonderful and genial race;
all generous appreciation of the way they are carrying themselves now
seems to me of the highest international value and importance, and,
frankly, I wish more of that found its way into our newspapers here, so
prodigiously (even if erratically) copious about our own doings. We
ought to commend and commemorate and celebrate them--our Allies'
doings--more publicly and explicitly--but the want of imagination
hereabouts (save as to that of--to the report of--grand things that
haven't happened) is often almost a painful impression. I find myself
really wondering whether people can do without it, succeed without it,
as much as that! One meets constant examples of a sort of unpenetrated
state which disconcert and rather alarm. However, these remarks are but
the fruit of the fact that something stirs in me ever so deeply and
gratefully, almost to the point of a pang, at all rendering of justice
and homage to the children of France! Go on being charming and
responsive to them--it will do _us_ good as well as do them. I am sure
their (your particular guests') enjoyment of your agitated dinner was
exquisite.

Very interesting, not less, your picture of the blest irreflection and
absence of morbid analysis in which you are living--in face of all the
possibilities; and wondrous enough surely must be all the changes and
lapses of importance and value, of sensibility itself, the difference of
your relation to things and the drop out of some relations
altogether.... But I catch in your remarks the silver thread of
optimism, not bulging out but subtly gleaming, and it gives me no end of
satisfaction. A few gleams have lately been coming to me otherwise, and
the action of Neuve Chapelle (if I may rashly name it,) which we have
reports of in the papers, is I suppose the one you speak of as cheering.
The great thing we do in London, however, is to strain our ears for the
thunder of the Dardanelles, which we even feel that we get pretty
straight and pretty strong, and in which we see consequences the most
tremendous, verily beyond all present utterance. Nothing in all the war
has made me hang on it in such suspense--though we venture even almost
to presume. I see few people--and _try_ to see only those I positively
want to; whom, par exemple, I value the exchange of earnest remarks with
more than ever. But I am ill-conditioned for "telling" you things--and
indeed I should think meanly of London if there _was_ very much to tell.
A few nights ago I dined with Mervyn O'Gorman, my rather near neighbour
here, and met a youngish and exceedingly interesting, in fact charming,
Colonel Brancker, just back from the front--both of which high
aeronautic experts you probably know. I mention them because I extracted
from them so intense a thrill--drawing them out--for they let me--on the
subject of the so more and more revealed affinity of the British
temperament with that of the conquering airman--and thereby of the
extent to which the military, or the energetic, future of this country
may be in the air. They put it so splendidly that I went home
unspeakably rejoicing (it may "mean" so much!) and as if myself
ponderously soaring. But what am I ridiculously remarking to _you_? The
great point I wish to make is the lively welcome I shall give you in
April--thank you for that knowledge; and that I am all-faithfully yours,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Mrs. Wharton._


_Dictated._

/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.

March 23rd, 1915.
*/

/*
Chère Madame et Confrère,
*/

Don't imagine for a moment that I don't feel the full horror of my
having had to wait till now, when I can avail myself of this aid, to
acknowledge, as the poor pale pettifogging term has it, the receipt from
you of inexpressibly splendid bounties. I won't attempt to explain or
expatiate--about this abject failure of utterance: the idea of
"explaining" anything to _you_ in these days, or of any expatiation that
isn't exclusively that of your own genius upon your own adventures and
impressions! I think _the_ reason why I have been so baffled, in a word,
is that all my powers of being anything else have gone to living upon
your two magnificent letters, the one from Verdun, and the one after
your second visit there; which gave me matter of experience and
appropriation to which I have done the fullest honour. Your whole record
is sublime, and the interest and the beauty and the terror of it all
have again and again called me back to it. I have ventured to share it,
for the good of the cause and the glory of the connection (mine,) with
two or three select others--this I candidly confess to you--one of whom
was dear Howard, absolutely as dear as ever through everything, and whom
I all but reduced to floods of tears, tears of understanding and
sympathy. I know them at last, your incomparable pages, by heart--and
thus it is really that I feel qualified to speak to you of them. With
the two sublimities in question, or between them, came of course also
the couple of other favours, enclosing me, pressing back upon me, my
attempted contribution to your Paris labour: to which perversity I have
had to bow my head. I was very sorry to be so forced, but even while
cursing and gnashing my teeth I got your post-office order cashed, and
the money _is_, God knows, assistingly spendable here! Another pang was
your mention of Jean du Breuil's death.... I didn't know him, had never
seen him; but your account of the admirable manner of his end makes one
feel that one would like even to have just beheld him. We are in the
midst, the very midst, of histories of that sort, miserable and
terrible, here too; the Neuve Chapelle business, from a strange, in the
sense of being a pretty false, glamour at first flung about which we are
gradually recovering, seems to have taken a hideous toll of officers,
and other distressing legends (legends of mistake and confusion) are
somehow overgrowing it too. But painful particulars are not what I want
to give you--of anything; you are up to your neck in your own, and I had
much rather pick my steps to the clear places, so far as there be any
such! I continue to try and keep my own existence one, so far as I
may--a place clear of the last accablement, I mean: apparently what it
comes to is that it's "full up" with the last but one.

_Wednesday, 24th._ I had to break this off yesterday--and it was time,
apparently, with the rather dreary note I was sounding: though I don't
know that I have a very larky one to go on with to-day--save so far as
the taking of the big Austrian fortress, which I can neither write nor
pronounce, makes one a little soar and sing. This seems really to
represent something, but how much I put forth not the slightest
pretension to measure. In fact I think I am not measuring anything
whatever just now, and not pretending to--I find myself, much more,
quite consentingly dumb in the presence of the boundless enormity; and
when I wish to give myself the best possible account of this state of
mind I call it the pious attitude of waiting. Verily there is much to
wait for--but there I am at it again, and should blush to offer you in
the midst of what I believe to be your more grandly attuned state, such
a pale apology for a living faith. Probably all that's the matter with
one is one's vicious propensity to go on feeling more and more, instead
of less and less--which would be so infinitely more convenient; for the
former course puts one really quite out of relation to almost everybody
else and causes one to circle helplessly round outer social edges like a
kind of prowling pariah. However, I try to be as stupid as I can....

All the while, with this, I am not expressing my deep appreciation of
your generous remarks about again placing Frederick at my disposition. I
am doing perfectly well in these conditions without a servant; my life
is so simplified that all acuteness of need has been abated; in short I
manage--and it is of course fortunate, inasmuch as the question would
otherwise not be at all practically soluble. No young man of military
age would I for a moment consider--and in fact there _are_ none about,
putting aside the physically inapt (for the Army)--and these are kept
tight hold of by those who can use them. Small boys and aged men are
alone available--but the matter has in short not the least importance.
The thing that most assuages me continues to be dealing with the wounded
in such scant measure as I may; such, e.g., as my having turned into
Victoria Station, yesterday afternoon, to buy an evening paper and there
been so struck with the bad lameness of a poor hobbling khaki
convalescent that I inquired of him to such sympathetic effect that, by
what I can make out, I must have committed myself to the support of him
for the remainder of his days--a trifle on account having sealed the
compact on the spot. It all helps, however--helps _me_; which is so much
what I do it for. Let it help _you_ by ricochet, even a little too....

...Good-bye for now, and believe me, less gracelessly and faithlessly
than you might well, your would-be so decent old

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Thomas Sergeant Perry._


_Dictated._

/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.
March 27th, 1915.
*/

/*
My dear Thomas and my dear Lilla:
*/

Don't resent please the economic form of this address, the frugal
attempt to make one grateful acknowledgment serve for both of you: for I
think that if you were just now on this scene itself there isn't a shade
of anxious simplification that you wouldn't at once perfectly grasp. The
effect of the biggest and most appalling complication the world has ever
known is somehow, paradoxically, as we used to say at Newport, an effect
of simplification too--producing, that is, a desperate need for the
same, in all sorts of ways, lest one be submerged by the monster of a
myriad bristles. In short you do understand of course, and how it is
that I should be invidiously writing to _you_, Lilla, in response to
your refreshing favour of some little time since (the good one about
your having shrieked Rule Britannia at somebody's lecture, or at least
done something quite as vociferous and to the point, and quite as
helpful to our sacred cause). This exclusive benefit should you be
enjoying, I say, hadn't a most beneficial letter from Thomas come to me
but yesterday, crowning the edifice of a series of suchlike bounties
which he has been so patient over my poor old inevitable silence
about....

You inflame me so scarcely less, Thomas, with your wonderful statistics
of the American theatre of my infancy, à propos of my printed prattle
about it, that I could almost find it in me to inquire from what
published source it is you recover the ghostly little facts. Are they
presented in some procurable volume that would be possible to send me? I
ask with a queer dim feeling that they might, or the fingered volume
might, operate as a blest little diversion from our eternal obsession
here. I have reached the point now, after eight months of that
oppression, of cultivating small arts of escape, small plunges into
oblivion and dissimulation; in fact I am able to read again--for ever so
long this power was almost blighted--and to want to become as
dissociated as possible from the present.

...However, I didn't mean to be black--but only pearly grey, as your
letter so benevolently incites: yours too, Lilla, for I keep you
together in all this. And I don't, you see, pretend to treat you to any
scrap of information whatever--you have more of the public, of a hundred
sorts, than we, I guess: and the private mostly turns out, in these
parts, to go but on one leg, after the first fond glimpse of it. I
lunched yesterday with the Prime Minister, on the chance of catching
some gleam between the chinks--which was idiotic of me, because it's
mostly in those circles that the chinks are well puttied over. The
nearest I came to any such was through my being told by a member of the
P.M.'s family, whom I wouldn't enable you to identify for the world,
that she had heard him just before luncheon say to three or four members
of the Government, and even Cabinet, gathered at the house, that
something-or-other was "the most awkward situation he had ever found
himself up against": with the comment that she, my informant, was in
liveliest suspense to know what it was he had alluded to in those
portentous terms. Which I give, however, but as a specimen of the
_bouché_ chink, not of the gaping; the admirable (as I think him, quite
affectionately think him) Master of the Situation having presently
joined us in the most unmistakeable serenity of strength and cheer, and
the riddle remaining at any rate without the least pretence of, or for
that matter need of, a key. It will be a hundred years old by the time
my small anecdote reaches you, and not have _le moindre rapport_ to
anything that in the least concerns us _then_. But I must tear myself
from you, and try withal to close on some sublime note--a large choice
of which sort I feel we are for that matter perfectly possessed of.
Well, then, a friend of much veracity told me a couple of days since
that a friend of his (I admit that it's always a friend of somebody
else's,) an officer of the upper command, just over for a couple of days
from the Front, had spoken to him of the now enormous mass of the French
and British troops fronting the enemy as covering, in dense gatheredness
together, 40 miles of the land of France--I don't mean in length of
front, of course, which would be nothing, but in rearward extent and
just standing, so to speak, in close-packed available spatial presence.
But there I am at an item--and I abjure items, they defy all dealing
with, and am your affectionate old

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Edward Marsh._

/#
     A copy of this letter was sent by Mr. Marsh to Rupert Brooke, then
     with the Dardanelles Expeditionary Force; it reached him two days
     before his death. The letter refers of course to his "1914"
     Sonnets. The line criticised in the first sonnet is: "And the worst
     friend and enemy is but death."
#/


/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.
March 28th, 1915.
*/

/*
Dear admirable Eddie!
*/

I take it very kindly indeed of you to have found thought and time to
send me the publication with the five brave sonnets. The circumstances
(so to call the unspeakable matter) that have conduced to them, and
that, taken together, seem to make a sort of huge brazen lap for their
congruous beauty, have caused me to read them with an emotion that
somehow precludes the critical measure, deprecates the detachment
involved in that, and makes me just want--oh so exceedingly much--to be
moved by them and to "like" and admire them. So I do greet them gladly,
and am right consentingly struck with their happy force and truth: they
seem to me to have _come_, in a fine high beauty and sincerity (though
not in every line with an equal _degree_ of those--which indeed is a
rare case anywhere;) and this evening, alone by my lamp, I have been
reading them over and over to myself aloud, as if fondly to test and
truly to try them; almost in fact as if to reach the far-off author, in
whatever unimaginable conditions, by some miraculous, some telepathic
intimation that I am in quavering communion with him. Well, they have
borne the test with almost all the firm perfection, or straight
inevitability, that one must find in a sonnet, and beside their poetic
strength they draw a wondrous weight from his having had the _right_ to
produce them, as it were, and their rising out of such rare realities of
experience. Splendid Rupert--to be the soldier that could beget them on
the Muse! and lucky Muse, not less, who could have an affair with a
soldier and yet feel herself not guilty of the least deviation! In order
of felicity I think Sonnet I comes first, save for a small matter that
(perhaps superfluously) troubles me and that I will presently speak of.
I place next III, with its splendid first line; and then V ("In that
rich earth a richer dust concealed!") and then II. I don't speak of No.
IV--I think it the least fortunate (in spite of "Touched flowers and
furs, and cheeks!") But the four happy ones are very noble and sound and
round, to my sense, and I take off my hat to them, and to their author,
in the most marked manner. There are many things one likes, simply, and
then there are things one likes to like (or at least that I do;) and
these are of that order. My reserve on No. I bears on the last line--to
the extent, I mean, of not feeling happy about that _but_ before the
last word. It may be fatuous, but I am wondering if this line mightn't
have acquitted itself better as: "And the worst friend and foe is only
death." There is an "only" in the preceding line, but the repetition
is--or would be--to me not only not objectionable, but would have
positive merit. My only other wince is over the "given" and "heaven"
rhyme at the end of V; it has been so inordinately vulgarized that I
don't think it good enough company for the rest of the sonnet, which
without it I think I would have put second in order instead of the III.
The kind of idea it embodies is one that always so fetches _this_ poor
old Anglomaniac. But that is all--and this, my dear Eddie, is all. Don't
dream of acknowledging these remarks in all your strain and stress--that
you should think I could bear that would fill me with horror. The only
sign I want is that if you should be able to write to Rupert, which I
don't doubt you on occasion manage, you would tell him of my pleasure
and my pride. If he should be at all touched by this it would infinitely
touch _me_. In fact, should you care to send him on this sprawl, that
would save you other trouble, and I would risk his impatience. I think
of him quite inordinately, and not less so of you, my dear Eddie, and am
yours all faithfully and gratefully,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/

P.S. I have been again reading out V, to myself (I read them very well),
and find I _don't_ so much mind that blighted balance!




_To Edward Marsh._


/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.
March 30th, 1915.
*/

/*
My dear Eddie,
*/

After my acknowledgment of the beautiful things had gone to you, came in
your note, and now your quite blessed letter. So I call it because it
testified to my having so happily given you that particular pleasure
which is the finest, I think, one can feel--the joy in short that you
allude to and that I myself rejoice in your taking. Splendid Rupert
indeed--and splendid _you_, in the generosity of your emotion!

I had stupidly overlooked that preliminary lyric, with its so charming
climax of an image. But I think--if you won't feel me over-contentious
for it--that your reasoning à propos of "heaven, given" &c. rather halts
as to the matter of rhyme and sense, or in other words sense and poetic
expression. Note well that, poetically speaking, it's not the sense
that's the expression, the "rhyme" or whatever, but those things that
are the sense, and that they so far betray it when they find for the
"only" words any but the ideally right or the (so to speak) quietly
proud. However, I didn't mean to plunge into these depths--there are too
many other depths now; I only meant to tell you how I participate and to
be yours, in this, all faithfully,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Mrs. Wharton._

/#
     Lieut. Jean du Breuil de St. Germain, distinguished cavalry
     officer, sociologist, traveller, was killed in action near Arras,
     February 22, 1915.
#/


/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.
April 3rd, 1915.
*/

/*
Dearest Edith,
*/

Bounties unacknowledged and unmeasured continue to flow in from you, for
this a.m., after your beautiful letter enclosing your copy of M.
Séguier's so extraordinarily fine and touching one, arrive your two
_livraisons_ of the Revue containing the Dixmude of which you wrote me.
It is quite heartbreakingly noble of you to find initiative for the
rendering and the remembering of such services and such assurances, for
I myself gaze at almost _any_ display of initiative as I should stare at
a passing charge of cavalry down the Brompton Road--where we haven't
come to that yet, though we may for one reason and another indeed soon
have to. One is surrounded in fact here with more affirmations of energy
than you might gather from some of the accounts of matters that appear
in the _Times_, and yet the paralysis of my own power to do anything
but increasingly and inordinately _feel_, feel in a way to make
communication with almost all others impossible, they living and
thinking in such different terms--and yet that paralysis, _dis-je_, more
and more swallows up everything but the sore and sterile unresting
imagination. I can't proceed upon it after your sublime fashion--and in
fact its aching life is a practical destruction of every other sort,
which is why I call it sterile. But the extent, all the same, to which
one will have inwardly and darkly and drearily and dreadfully
lived!--with those victims of nervous horror in the ambulance-church,
the little chanting country church of the deadly serried beds of your
Verdun letter, and those others, the lacerated and untended in the
"fetid stable-heat" of the other place and the second letter--all of
whom live _with_ me and haunt and "inhibit" me. And so does your friend
du Breuil, and _his_ friend your admirable correspondent (in what a
nobleness and blest adequacy of expression their feeling finds
relief)--and this in spite of my having neither known nor seen either of
them; Séguier creating in one to positive sickness the personal pang
about your friend and his, and his letter making me feel the horror it
does himself, even as if my affection had something at stake in that.
But I don't know why I treat you thus to the detail of one's
perpetually-renewed waste. You will have plenty of detail of your own,
little waste as I see you allowing yourself.

I haven't yet had the hour of reading your Dixmudes, which I am
momentarily reserving, under some other pressure, but they shall not
miss my fond care--so little has any face of the nightmare been
reflected for me in any form of beauty as yet; your Verdun letter
excepted. This keeps making mere blue-books and yellow-books and
rapports the only reading that isn't, or that hasn't been, below the
level; through their not pretending to express but only giving one the
material. As it happens, when your Revues came I was reading Georges
Ohnet and in one of the three fascicules of his Bourgeois de Paris that
have alone, as yet, turned up here! and reading him, _ma foi_, with deep
submission to his spell! Funny enough to be redevable at this time of
day to that genius, who has come down from the cross where poor
vanquished Jules Lemaître long ago nailed him up, as if to work fresh
miracles, dancing for it on Jules's very grave. But he is in fact
extraordinarily vivid and candid and amusing, with the force of an angry
little hunchback and a perfect and quite gratifying vulgarity of
passion; also, probably, with a perfect enormity of _vente_--in which
one takes pleasure.

Easter has operated to clear London in something like the fine old
way--we would really seem to stick so much to our fine old ways. I don't
truly know what to make of some of them--and yet don't let yourself
suppose from some of such appearances that the stiffness and toughness
of the country isn't on the whole deeper than anything else. Such at
least is my own indefeasible conviction--or impression. It's the
queerest of peoples--with its merits and defects so extraordinarily
parts of each other; its wantonness of refusals--in some of these
present ways--such a part of its attachment to freedom, of the
individualism which makes its force that of a collection of individuals
and its voluntaryism of such a strong quality. But it won't be the
defects, it will be the merits, I believe, that will have the last word.
Strange that the country should need a still bigger convulsion--for
itself; it does, however, and it will get it--and will act under it.
France has had hers in the form of invasion--and I don't know of what
form ours will yet have to be. But it will come--and then we
shall--damp and dense, but not vicious, not vicious _enough_, and
immensely capable if we can once get _dry_. _Voilà_ that _I_ am,
however; yet with it so yours,

/*
H. J.
*/




_To Edward Marsh._

/#
     Rupert Brooke died on a French hospital-ship in the Aegean Sea,
     April 28, 1915, while serving with the Royal Naval Division.
#/


/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.
April 24th, 1915.
*/

/*
My dear dear Eddie,
*/

This is too horrible and heart-breaking. If there was a stupid and
hideous disfigurement of life and outrage to beauty left for our awful
conditions to perpetrate, those things have been now supremely achieved,
and no other brutal blow in the private sphere can better them for
making one just stare through one's tears. One had thought of one's self
as advised and stiffened as to what was possible, but one sees (or at
least I feel) how sneakingly one had clung to the idea of the happy, the
favouring, hazard, the dream of what still might be for the days to
come. But why do I speak of my pang, as if it had a right to breathe in
presence of yours?--which makes me think of you with the last tenderness
of understanding. I value extraordinarily having seen him here in the
happiest way (in Downing St., &c.) two or three times before he left
England, and I measure by that the treasure of your own memories and the
dead weight of your own loss. What a price and a refinement of beauty
and poetry it gives to those splendid sonnets--which will enrich our
whole collective consciousness. We must speak further and better, but
meanwhile all my impulse is to tell you to entertain the pang and taste
the bitterness for all they are "worth"--to know to the fullest extent
what has happened to you and not miss one of the hard ways in which it
will come home. You won't have again any relation of that beauty, won't
know again that mixture of the elements that made him. And he was the
breathing beneficent man--and now turned to this! But there's something
to keep too--his legend and his image will hold. Believe by how much I
am, my dear Eddie, more than ever yours,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To G. W. Prothero._


/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.
April 24th, 1915.
*/

/*
Dear George,
*/

I can't not thank you for your interesting remittances, the one about
the Salubrity of the Soldier perhaps in particular. That paper is indeed
an admirable statement of what one is mainly struck with--the only at
all consoling thing in all the actual horror, namely: the splendid
personal condition of the khaki-clad as they overflow the town. It
represents a kind of physical _redemption_--and that is something, is
much, so long as the individual case of it lasts.

As for the President, he is really looking up. I feel as if it kind of
made everything else do so! It does at any rate your all-faithful old

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Wilfred Sheridan._


/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.
May 31st, 1915.
*/

/*
My dear dear Wilfred,
*/

I have been hearing from Clare and Margaret, and writing to them--with
the effect on my feelings so great that even if I hadn't got their leave
to address you thus directly, and their impression that you would
probably have patience with me, I should still be perpetrating this act,
from the simple force of--well, let me say of fond affection and have
done with it. I really take as much interest in your movements and
doings, in all your conditions, as if I were Margaret herself--such
great analogies prevail between the heavy uncle and the infant daughter
when following their object up is concerned. I haven't kept my thoughts
off you at all--not indeed that I have tried!--since those days early in
the winter, in that little London house, where you were so admirably
interesting and vivid about your first initiations and impressions and I
pressed you so hard over the whole ground, and didn't know whether most
to feel your acute intelligence at play or your kindness to your poor
old gaping visitor. I've neglected no opportunity of news of you since
then, though I've picked the article up in every and any way save by
writing to you--which my respect for your worried attention and general
overstrain forbade me to regard as a decent act. At the same time, when
I heard of your having, at Crowborough or wherever, a sharp illness of
some duration, I turned really sick myself for sympathy--I couldn't see
the faintest propriety in that. And now my sentiments hover about you
with the closest fidelity, and when I think of the stiff experience and
all the strange initiations (so to express my sense of them) that must
have crowded upon you, I am lost in awe at the vision. For you're the
kind of defender of his country to whom I take off my hat most abjectly
and utterly--the thinking, feeling, refining hero, who knows and
compares, and winces and overcomes, and on whose lips I promise myself
one of these days to hang again with a gape even beyond that of last
winter. I wish to goodness I could do something more and better for you
than merely address you these vain words; however, they won't hurt you
at least, for they carry with them an intensity of good will. I won't
pretend to give you any news, for it's you who make all ours--and we are
now really in the way, I think, of doing everything conceivable to back
you up in that, and thereby become worthy of you. America, my huge queer
country, is being flouted by Germany in a manner that looks more and
more like a malignant design, and if this should (very soon) truly
appear, and that weight of consequent prodigious resentment should be
able to do nothing else than throw itself into the scale, then we should
be backing you up to some purpose. The weight would in one way and
another be overwhelming. But these are vast issues, and I have only
wanted to give you for the moment my devotedest personal blessing. Think
of me as in the closest sustaining communion with Clare, and don't for a
moment dream that I propose--I mean presume--to lay upon you the
smallest burden of notice of the present beyond just letting it remind
you of the fond faith of yours, my dear Wilfred, all affectionately,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Edward Marsh._

/#
     The volume sent by Mr. Marsh was Rupert Brooke's _1914 and other
     Poems_.
#/


/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.
June 6th, 1915.
*/

/*
Dearest Eddie,
*/

I thank you ever so kindly for this advance copy of Rupert's volume,
which you were right (and blest!) in feeling that I should intensely
prize. I have been spending unspeakable hours over it--heart-breaking
ones, under the sense of the stupid extinction of so exquisite an
instrument and so exquisite a being. Immense the generosity of his
response to life and the beauty and variety of the forms in which it
broke out, and of which these further things are such an enriching
exhibition. His place is now very high and very safe--even though one
walks round and round it with the aching soreness of having to take the
monument for the man. It's so wretched talking, really, of any "place"
but his place _with_ us, and in our eyes and affection most of all, the
other being such as could wait, and grow with all confidence and power
_while_ waiting. He has something, at any rate, one feels in this
volume, that puts him singularly apart even in his eminence--the fact
that, member of the true high company as he is and poet of the strong
wings (for he seems to me extraordinarily strong,) he has _charm_ in a
way of a kind that belong to none of the others, who have their beauty
and abundance, their distinction and force and grace, whatever it may
be, but haven't that particular thing as he has it and as he was going
to keep on having it, since it was of his very nature--by which I mean
that of his genius. The point is that I think he would still have had it
even if he had grown bigger and bigger, and stronger and stronger (for
this is what he _would_ have done,) and thereby been almost alone in
this idiosyncrasy. Even of Keats I don't feel myself saying that he had
charm--it's all lost in the degree of beauty, which somehow allows it no
chance. But in Rupert (not that I match them!) there is the beauty, so
great, and then the charm, different and playing beside it and savouring
of the very quality of the man. What it comes to, I suppose, is that he
touches me most when he is whimsical and personal, even at the poetic
pitch, or in the poetic purity, as he perpetually is. And he penetrates
me most when he is most hauntingly (or hauntedly) English--he draws such
a real magic from his conscious reference to it. He is extraordinarily
so even in the War sonnets--not that that isn't highly natural too; and
the reading of these higher things over now, which one had first read
while he was still there to be exquisitely at stake in them, so to
speak, is a sort of refinement both of admiration and of anguish. The
present gives them such sincerity--as if they had wanted it! I adore the
ironic and familiar things, the most intimately English--the Chilterns
and the Great Lover (towards the close of which I recognise the misprint
you speak of, but fortunately so obvious a one--the more flagrant the
better--that you needn't worry:) and the Funeral of Youth, awfully
charming; and of course Grantchester, which is booked for immortality. I
revel in Grantchester--and how it would have made one love him if one
hadn't known him. As it is it wrings the heart! And yet after all what
do they do, all of them together, but again express how life had been
wonderful and crowded and fortunate and exquisite for him?--with his
sensibilities all so exposed, really exposed, and yet never taking the
least real harm. He seems to me to have had in his short life so much
that one may almost call it everything. And he isn't tragic now--he has
only stopped. It's we who are tragic--you and his mother especially, and
whatever others; for we can't stop, and we wish we could. The portrait
has extreme beauty, but is somehow disconnected. However, great beauty
does disconnect! But good-night--with the lively sense that I _must_ see
you again before I leave town--which won't be, though, before early in
July. I hope you are having less particular strain and stress and am
yours all faithfully,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Edward Marsh._

/#
     This refers to a photograph of Rupert Brooke, sent by Mr. Marsh,
     and to the death of his friend Denis Browne, who was with R. B.
     when he died. A letter from Browne, describing Rupert Brooke's
     burial on the island of Scyros, had been read to H. J. by Mr. Marsh
     the day before the following was written.
#/


/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.
June 13th, 1915.
*/

/*
Dearest Eddie,
*/

The photograph is wonderful and beautiful--and a mockery! I mean
encompassed with such an ache and such a pang that it sets up for one's
vision a regularly accepted, unabated pain. And now _you_ have another
of like sort, the fruit of this horrible time--which I presume almost to
share with you, as a sign of the tenderness I bear you. I wish indeed
that for this I might once have _seen_ D. B., kind brothering D. B., the
reading by you of whose letter last night, under the pang of _his_
extinction, the ghost telling of the ghost, moved me more than I could
find words for. He brothered you almost as much as he had brothered
Rupert--and I could almost feel that he practically a little brothered
poor old _me_, for which I so thank his spirit! And this now the end of
his brothering! Of anything more in his later letter that had any
_relation_ you will perhaps still some day tell me....

/*
Yours all faithfully,

HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Compton Mackenzie._

/#
     Mr. Mackenzie was at this time attached to Sir Ian Hamilton's
     headquarters with the Dardanelles Expeditionary Force.
#/


/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.
June 18th, 1915.
*/

/*
My dear Monty,
*/

All this while have I remained shamefully in your debt for interesting
news, and I am plunged deeper into that condition by your admirable
report from the Dardanelles in this a.m.'s Times. I am a backward being,
alas, in these days when so much is forward; our public anxieties
somehow strike for me at the roots of letter-writing, and I remain too
often dumb, not because I am not thinking and feeling a thousand things,
but exactly because I am doing so to such intensity. You wrote me weeks
ago that you had finished your new novel--which information took my
breath away (I mean by its windlike rush)--and now has come thus much of
the remainder of the adventure for which that so grandly liberated you
and which I follow with the liveliest participation in all your splendid
sense of it and profit of it. I confess I take an enormous pleasure in
the fact of the exposure of the sensitive plate of your imagination,
your tremendous attention, to all these wonderful and terrible things.
What impressions you are getting, verily--and what a breach must it all
not make with the course of history you are practising up to the very
eve. I rejoice that you finished and snipped off, or tucked in and wound
up, something self-contained there--for how could you ever go back to it
if you hadn't?--under that violence of rupture with the past which makes
me ask myself what will have become of all that material we were taking
for granted, and which now lies there behind us like some vast damaged
cargo dumped upon a dock and unfit for human purchase or consumption. I
seem to fear that I shall find myself seeing your recently concluded
novel as through a glass darkly--which, however, will not prevent my
immediately falling upon it when it appears; as I assume, however, that
it is not now likely to do before the summer's end--by which time God
knows what other monstrous chapters of history won't have been
perpetrated! What I most want to say to you, I think, is that I rejoice
for you with all my heart in that assurance of health which has enabled
you so to gird yourself and go forth. If the torrid south has always
been good for you there must be no amount of it that you are now not
getting--though I am naturally reduced, you see, to quite abjectly
helpless and incompetent supposition. I hang about you at any rate with
all sorts of vows and benedictions. I feel that I mustn't make remarks
about the colossal undertaking you are engaged in beyond saying that I
believe with all my heart in the final power of your push. As for our
news here the gist of that is that we are living with our eyes on you
and more and more materially backing you. My comment on you is feeble,
but my faith absolute, and I am, my dear Monty, your more than ever
faithful old

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/

P.S. I have your address, of many integuments, from your mother, but
feel rather that my mountain of envelopes should give birth to a
livelier mouse!




_To Henry James, junior._


_Dictated._

/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.
June 24th, 1915.
*/

/*
Dearest Harry,
*/

I am writing to you in this fashion even although I am writing you
"intimately"; because I am not at the present moment in very good form
for any free play of hand, and this machinery helps me so much when
there is any question of pressure and promptitude, or above all of
particular clearness. That _is_ the case at present--at least I feel I
ought to lose no more time.

You will wonder what these rather portentous words refer to--but don't
be too much alarmed! It is only that my feeling about my situation here
has under the stress of events come so much to a head that, certain
particular matters further contributing, I have arranged to seek
technical (legal) advice no longer hence than this afternoon as to the
exact modus operandi of my becoming naturalised in this country. This
state of mind probably won't at all surprise you, however; and I think I
can assure you that it certainly wouldn't if you were now on the scene
here with me and had the near vision of all the circumstances. My sense
of how everything more and more makes for it has been gathering force
ever since the war broke out, and I have thus waited nearly a whole
year; but my feeling has become acute with the information that I can
only go down to Lamb House now on the footing of an Alien under Police
supervision--an alien friend of course, which is a very different thing
from an alien enemy, but still a definite technical outsider to the
whole situation here, in which my affections and my loyalty are so
intensely engaged. I feel that if I take this step I shall simply
rectify a position that has become inconveniently and uncomfortably
false, making my civil status merely agree not only with my moral, but
with my material as well, in every kind of way. Hadn't it been for the
War I should certainly have gone on as I was, taking it as the simplest
and easiest and even friendliest thing: but the circumstances are
utterly altered now, and to feel with the country and the cause as
absolutely and ardently as I feel, and not offer them my moral support
with a perfect consistency (my material is too small a matter), affects
me as standing off or wandering loose in a detachment of no great
dignity. I have spent here all the best years of my life--they
practically have _been_ my life: about a twelvemonth hence I shall have
been domiciled uninterruptedly in England for forty years, and there is
not the least possibility, at my age, and in my state of health, of my
ever returning to the U.S. or taking up any relation with it as a
country. My practical relation has been to this one for ever so long,
and now my "spiritual" or "sentimental" quite ideally matches it. I am
telling you all this because I can't not want exceedingly to take you
into my confidence about it--but again I feel pretty certain that you
will understand me too well for any great number of words more to be
needed. The real truth is that in a matter of this kind, under such
extraordinarily special circumstances, one's own intimate feeling must
speak and determine the case. Well, without haste and without rest, mine
has done so, and with the prospect of what I have called the
rectification, a sense of great relief, a great lapse of awkwardness,
supervenes.

I think that even if by chance your so judicious mind should be disposed
to suggest any reserves--I think, I say, that I should then still ask
you not to launch them at me unless they should seem to you so important
as to balance against my own argument and, frankly speaking, my own
absolute need and passion here; which the whole experience of the past
year has made quite unspeakably final. I can't imagine at all what these
objections should be, however--my whole long relation to the country
having been what it is. Regard my proceeding as a simple act and
offering of allegiance and devotion, recognition and gratitude (for long
years of innumerable relations that have meant so much to me,) and it
remains perfectly simple. Let me repeat that I feel sure I shouldn't in
the least have come to it without this convulsion, but one is _in_ the
convulsion (I wouldn't be out of it either!) and one must act
accordingly. I feel all the while too that the tide of American identity
of consciousness with our own, about the whole matter, rises and rises,
and will rise still more before it rests again--so that every day the
difference of situation diminishes and the immense fund of common
sentiment increases. However, I haven't really meant so much to
expatiate. What I am doing this afternoon is, I think, simply to get
exact information--though I am already sufficiently aware of the
question to know that after my long existence here the process of
naturalisation is very simple and short.... My last word about the
matter, at any rate, has to be that my decision is absolutely tied up
with my innermost personal feeling. I think that will only make you
glad, however, and I add nothing more now but that I am your
all-affectionate old Uncle,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Edmund Gosse._

/#
     H. J.'s four sponsors at his naturalisation were Mr. Asquith, Mr.
     Gosse, Mr. J. B. Pinker, and Mr. G. W. Prothero.
#/


/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.
June 25th, 1915.
*/

/*
My dear Gosse,
*/

Remarkably enough, I should be writing you this evening even if I hadn't
received your interesting information about ----, concerning whom
nothing perversely base and publicly pernicious at all surprises me. He
is the cleverest idiot and the most pernicious talent imaginable, and I
await to see if he won't somehow swing--!

But il ne s'agit pas de ça; il s'agit of the fact that there is a matter
I should have liked to speak to you of the other day when you lunched
here, yet hung fire about through its not having then absolutely come to
a head. It has within these days done so, and in brief it is _this_. The
force of the public situation now at last determines me to testify to my
attachment to this country, my fond domicile for nearly forty years
(forty _next_ year,) by applying for naturalisation here: the throwing
of my imponderable moral weight into the scale of her fortune is the
_geste_ that will best express my devotion--absolutely nothing _else_
will. Therefore my mind is made up, and you are the first person save my
Solicitor (whom I have had to consult) to whom the fact has been
imparted. Kindly respect for the moment the privacy of it. I learned
with horror just lately that if I go down into Sussex (for two or three
months of Rye) I have at once to register myself there as an Alien and
place myself under the observation of the Police. But that is only the
_occasion_ of my decision--it's not in the least the cause. The
disposition itself has haunted me as Wordsworth's sounding cataract
haunted _him_--"like a passion"--ever since the beginning of the War.
But the point, please, is this: that the process for me is really of the
simplest, and _may_ be very rapid, if I can obtain four honourable
householders to testify to their knowledge of me as a respectable
person, "speaking and writing English decently" etc. Will you give me
the great pleasure of being one of them?--signing a paper to that
effect? I should take it ever so kindly. And I should further take
kindly your giving me if possible your sense on _this_ delicate point.
Should you say that our admirable friend the Prime Minister would
perhaps be approachable by me as another of the signatory four?--to
whom, you see, great historic honour, not to say immortality, as my
sponsors, will accrue. I don't like to approach him without your so
qualified sense of the matter first--and he has always been so
beautifully kind and charming to me. I will do nothing till I hear from
you--but his signature (which my solicitor's representative, if not
himself, would simply wait upon him for) would enormously accelerate the
putting through of the application and the disburdening me of the Sussex
"restricted area" alienship--which it distresses me to carry on my back
a day longer than I need. I have in mind my other two sponsors, but if I
could have from you, in addition to your own personal response, on which
my hopes are so founded, your ingenious prefiguration (fed by your
intimacy with him) as to how the P.M. would "take" my appeal, you would
increase the obligations of yours all faithfully,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To J. B. Pinker._

/#
     The two articles here referred to, "The Long Wards" and "Within the
     Rim," were both eventually devoted to charitable purposes.
#/


/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.
June 29th, 1915.
*/

/*
My dear Pinker,
*/

I am glad to hear from you of the conditions in which the New York
Tribune representative thinks there will be no difficulty over the fee
for the article. I have in point of fact during the last three or four
days considerably written one--concerning which a question comes up
which I hope you won't think too tiresome. Making up my mind that
something as concrete and "human" as possible would be my best card to
play, I have done something about the British soldier, his aspect,
temper and tone, and the considerations he suggests, _as I have seen him
since the beginning of the war in Hospital_; where I have in fact
largely and constantly seen him. The theme lends itself, by my sense,
much; and I dare say I should have it rather to myself--though of course
there is no telling! But what I have been feeling in the
connection--having now done upwards of 3000 words--is that I should be
very grateful for leave to make them 4000 (without of course extension
of fee.) I have never been good for the mere snippet, and there is so
much to say and to feel! Would you mind asking her, in reporting to her
of what my subject is, whether this extra thousand would incommode them.
If she really objects to it I think I shall be then disposed to ask you
to make some _other_ application of my little paper (on the 4000 basis;)
in which case I should propose to the Tribune another idea, keeping it
down absolutely to the 3000. (I'm afraid I can't do less than that.) My
motive would probably in that case be a quite different and less
"concrete" thing; namely, the expression of my sense of the way the
Briton in general feels about his insulation, and his being in it and of
it, even through all this unprecedented stress. It would amount to a
statement or picture of his sense of the way his sea-genius has always
encircled and protected him, striking deep into his blood and his bones;
so that any reconsideration of his position in a new light inevitably
comes hard to him, and yet makes the process the effective development
of which it is interesting to watch. I should call this thing something
like "The New Vision," or, better still, simply "Insulation": though I
don't say _exactly_ that. At all events I should be able to make
something interesting of it, and it would of course inevitably take the
sympathetic turn. But I would _rather_ keep to the thing I have been
trying, if I may have the small extra space....

/*
Believe me yours ever,

HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Frederic Harrison._


/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.
July 3rd, 1915.
*/

/*
My dear Frederic Harrison,
*/

I think your so interesting letter of the other day most kind and
generous--it has greatly touched me. Mrs. Harrison had written me a
short time before, even more movingly, and with equal liberality, and I
feel my belated remembrance of you magnificently recognised. This has
been a most healing fact for me in a lacerated world. How splendid your
courage and activity and power, so continued, of production and
attention! I am sorry to say I find any such power in myself much
impaired and diminished--reduced to the shadow of what it once was. All
relations are dislocated and harmonies falsified, and one asks one's
self of what use, in such a general condition, is any direction of the
mind save straight to the thing that most and only matters. However, it
all comes back to that, and one does what one can because it's a _part_
of virtue. Also I find one is the better for every successful effort to
bring one's attention _home_. I have just read your "English" review of
Lord Eversley's book on Poland, which you have made me desire at once to
get and read--even though your vivid summary makes me also falter before
the hideous old tragedy over which the actual horrors are being
re-embroidered. I thank you further for letting me know of your paper in
the Aberdeen magazine--though on reflection I can wait for it if it's to
be included in your volume now so soon to appear--I shall so straightly
possess myself of that. As to the U.S.A., I am afraid I suffer almost
more than I can endure from the terms of precautionary "friendship" on
which my country is content to remain with the author of such systematic
abominations--I cover my head with my mantle in presence of so much
wordy amicable discussing and conversing and reassuring and postponing,
all the while that such hideous evil and cruelty rages. To drag into our
European miseries any nation that is so fortunate as to be out of them,
and able to remain out with common self-respect, would be a deplorable
wish--but that holds true but up to a certain line of compromise. I
can't help feeling that for the U.S. this line has been crossed, and
that they have themselves great dangers, from the source of all ours, to
reckon with. However, one fortunately hasn't to decide the case or
appoint the hour--the relation between the two countries affects me as
being on a stiff downward slope at the bottom of which is rupture, and
_everything_ that takes place between them renders that incline more
rapid and shoves the position further down. The material and moral
weight that America would be able to throw into the scale by her
productive and financial power strikes me as enormous. There would be no
question of munitions then. What I mean is that I believe the truculence
of Germany may be trusted, from one month or one week to another now, to
force the American hand. It must indeed be helpful to both of you to
breathe your fine air of the heights. The atmosphere of London just now
is not positively tonic; but one must _find_ a tone, and I am, with more
faithful thought of Mrs. Harrison than I can express, your and her
affectionate old friend,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To H. G. Wells._

/#
     H. J. was always inclined to be impatient of the art of parody. The
     following refers to an example of it in Mr. Wells's volume, _Boon_.
#/


/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.
July 6th, 1915.
*/

/*
My dear Wells,
*/

I was given yesterday at a club your volume "Boon, etc.," from a loose
leaf in which I learn that you kindly sent it me and which yet appears
to have lurked there for a considerable time undelivered. I have just
been reading, to acknowledge it intelligently, a considerable number of
its pages--though not all; for, to be perfectly frank, I have been in
that respect beaten for the first time--or rather for the first time but
one--by a book of yours; I haven't found the current of it draw me on
and on this time--as, unfailingly and irresistibly, before (which I
have repeatedly let you know.) However, I shall try again--I hate to
lose any scrap of you that _may_ make for light or pleasure; and
meanwhile I have more or less mastered your appreciation of H. J., which
I have found very curious and interesting after a fashion--though it has
naturally not filled me with a fond elation. It is difficult of course
for a writer to put himself _fully_ in the place of another writer who
finds him extraordinarily futile and void, and who is moved to publish
that to the world--and I think the case isn't easier when he happens to
have enjoyed the other writer enormously from far back; because there
has then grown up the habit of taking some common meeting-ground between
them for granted, and the falling away of this is like the collapse of a
bridge which made communication possible. But I am by nature more in
dread of any fool's paradise, or at least of any bad misguidedness, than
in love with the idea of a security proved, and the fact that a mind as
brilliant as yours can resolve me into such an unmitigated mistake,
can't enjoy me in anything like the degree in which I like to think I
may be enjoyed, makes me greatly want to fix myself, for as long as my
nerves will stand it, with such a pair of eyes. I am aware of certain
things I have, and not less conscious, I believe, of various others that
I am simply reduced to wish I did or could have; so I try, for possible
light, to enter into the feelings of a critic for whom the deficiencies
so preponderate. The difficulty about that effort, however, is that one
can't keep it up--one _has_ to fall back on one's sense of one's good
parts--one's own sense; and I at least should have to do that, I think,
even if your picture were painted with a more searching brush. For I
should otherwise seem to forget what it is that my poetic and my appeal
to experience rest upon. They rest upon _my_ measure of
fulness--fulness of life and of the projection of it, which seems to you
such an emptiness of both. I don't mean to say I don't wish I could do
twenty things I can't--many of which you do so livingly; but I confess I
ask myself what would become in that case of some of those to which I am
most addicted and by which interest seems to me most beautifully
producible. I hold that interest may be, _must_ be, exquisitely made and
created, and that if we don't make it, we who undertake to, nobody and
nothing will make it for us; though nothing is more possible, nothing
may even be more certain, than that my quest of it, my constant wish to
run it to earth, may entail the sacrifice of certain things that are not
on the straight line of it. However, there are too many things to say,
and I don't think your chapter is really inquiring enough to entitle you
to expect all of them. The fine thing about the fictional form to me is
that it opens such widely different windows of attention; but that is
just why I like the window so to frame the play and the process!

/*
Faithfully yours,

HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To H. G. Wells._

/#
     With reference to the following letter, Mr. Wells kindly allows me
     to quote a passage from his answer, dated July 8, 1915, to the
     preceding: " ...There is of course a real and very fundamental
     difference in our innate and developed attitudes towards life and
     literature. To you literature like painting is an end, to me
     literature like architecture is a means, it has a use. Your view
     was, I felt, altogether too prominent in the world of criticism and
     I assailed it in lines of harsh antagonism. And writing that stuff
     about you was the first escape I had from the obsession of this
     war. _Boon_ is just a waste-paper basket. Some of it was written
     before I left my home at Sandgate (1911), and it was while I was
     turning over some old papers that I came upon it, found it
     expressive, and went on with it last December. I had rather be
     called a journalist than an artist, that is the essence of it, and
     there was no other antagonist possible than yourself. But since it
     was printed I have regretted a hundred times that I did not express
     our profound and incurable difference and contrast with a better
     grace...." In a further letter to Henry James, dated July 13, Mr.
     Wells adds: "I don't clearly understand your concluding
     phrases--which shews no doubt how completely they define our
     difference. When you say 'it is art that _makes_ life, makes
     interest, makes importance,' I can only read sense into it by
     assuming that you are using 'art' for every conscious human
     activity. I use the word for a research and attainment that is
     technical and special...."
#/


_Dictated._

/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.
July 10th, 1915.
*/

/*
My dear Wells,
*/

I am bound to tell you that I don't think your letter makes out any sort
of case for the bad manners of "Boon," as far as your indulgence in them
at the expense of your poor old H. J. is concerned--I say "your" simply
because he has _been_ yours, in the most liberal, continual,
sacrificial, the most admiring and abounding critical way, ever since he
began to know your writings: as to which you have had copious testimony.
Your comparison of the book to a waste-basket strikes me as the reverse
of felicitous, for what one throws into that receptacle is exactly what
one doesn't commit to publicity and make the affirmation of one's
estimate of one's contemporaries by. I should liken it much rather to
the preservative portfolio or drawer in which what is withheld from the
basket is savingly laid away. Nor do I feel it anywhere evident that my
"view of life and literature," or what you impute to me as such, is
carrying everything before it and becoming a public menace--so unaware
do I seem, on the contrary, that my products constitute an example in
any measurable degree followed or a cause in any degree successfully
pleaded: I can't but think that if this were the case I should find it
somewhat attested in their circulation--which, alas, I have reached a
very advanced age in the entirely defeated hope of. But I _have_ no view
of life and literature, I maintain, other than that our form of the
latter in especial is admirable exactly by its range and variety, its
plasticity and liberality, its fairly living on the sincere and shifting
experience of the individual practitioner. That is why I have always so
admired your so free and strong application of it, the particular rich
receptacle of intelligences and impressions emptied out with an energy
of its own, that your genius constitutes; and _that_ is in particular
why, in my letter of two or three days since I pronounced it curious and
interesting that you should find the case I constitute myself only
ridiculous and vacuous to the extent of your having to proclaim your
sense of it. The curiosity and the interest, however, in this latter
connection are of course for my mind those of the break of perception
(perception of the veracity of _my_ variety) on the part of a talent so
generally inquiring and apprehensive as yours. Of course for myself I
live, live intensely and am fed by life, and my value, whatever it be,
is in my own kind of expression of that. Therefore I am pulled up to
wonder by the fact that for you my kind (my sort of sense of expression
and sort of sense of life alike) doesn't exist; and that wonder is, I
admit, a disconcerting comment on my idea of the various appreciability
of our addiction to the novel and of all the personal and intellectual
history, sympathy and curiosity, behind the given example of it. It is
when that history and curiosity have been determined in the way most
different from my own that I want to get at them--precisely _for_ the
extension of life, which is the novel's best gift. But that is another
matter. Meanwhile I absolutely dissent from the claim that there are any
differences whatever in the amenability to art of forms of literature
aesthetically determined, and hold your distinction between a form that
is (like) painting and a form that is (like) architecture for wholly
null and void. There is no sense in which architecture is aesthetically
"for use" that doesn't leave any other art whatever exactly as much so;
and so far from that of literature being irrelevant to the literary
report upon life, and to its being made as interesting as possible, I
regard it as relevant in a degree that leaves everything else behind. It
is art that _makes_ life, makes interest, makes importance, for our
consideration and application of these things, and I know of no
substitute whatever for the force and beauty of its process. If I were
Boon I should say that any pretence of such a substitute is helpless and
hopeless humbug; but I wouldn't be Boon for the world, and am only yours
faithfully,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Henry James, junior._


/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.
July 20th, 1915.
*/

/*
Dearest Harry,
*/

How can I sufficiently tell you how moved to gratitude and appreciation
I am by your good letter of July 9th, just received, and the ready
understanding and sympathy expressed in which are such a blessing to
me! I did proceed, after writing to you, in the sense I then
explained--the impulse and the current were simply irresistible; and the
business has so happily developed that I this morning received, with
your letter, the kindest possible one from the Home Secretary, Sir John
Simon, I mean in the personal and private way, telling me that he has
just decreed the issue of my certificate of Naturalisation, which will
at once take effect. It will have thus been beautifully expedited, have
"gone through" in five or six days from the time my papers were sent in,
instead of the usual month or two. He gives me his blessing on the
matter, and all is well. It will probably interest you to know that the
indispensability of my step to myself has done nothing but grow since I
made my application; like Martin Luther at Wittenberg "I could no
other," and the relief of feeling corrected an essential falsity in my
position (as determined by the War and what has happened since, also
more particularly what has _not_ happened) is greater than I can say. I
have testified to my long attachment here in the only way I
could--though I certainly shouldn't have done it, under the inspiration
of our Cause, if the U.S.A. had done it a little more _for_ me. Then I
should have thrown myself back on that and been content with it; but as
this, at the end of a year, hasn't taken place, I have had to act for
myself, and I go so far as quite to think, I hope not fatuously, that I
shall have set an example and shown a little something of the way. But
enough--there it is!...

/*
Ever your affectionate old British Uncle,

HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Edmund Gosse._


/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.
July 26th, 1915.
*/

/*
My dear Gosse,
*/

Your good letter makes me feel that you will be interested to know that
since 4.30 this afternoon I have been able to say Civis Britannicus sum!
My Certificate of Naturalisation was received by my Solicitor this a.m.,
and a few hours ago I took the Oath of Allegiance, in his office, before
a Commissioner. The odd thing is that nothing seems to have happened and
that I don't feel a bit different; so that I see not at all how
associated I have become, but that I was really too associated before
for any nominal change to matter. The process has only shown me what I
virtually was--so that it's rather disappointing in respect to acute
sensation. I _haven't_ any, I blush to confess!...

I thank you enormously for your confidential passage, which is most
interesting and heartening.... And let me mention in exchange for your
confidence that a friend told me this afternoon that he had been within
a few days talking with ----, one of the American naval attachés,
whose competence he ranks high and to whom he had put some question
relative to the naval sense of the condition of these islands. To which
the reply had been: "You may take it from me that England is absolutely
impregnable and invincible"--and ---- repeated over--"impregnable
and invincible!" Which kind of did me good.

Let me come up and sit on your terrace some near August afternoon--I can
always be rung up, you know: I _like_ it--and believe me yours and your
wife's all faithfully,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To John S. Sargent._


/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.
July 30th, 1915.
*/

/*
My dear John,
*/

I am delighted to hear from you that you are writing and sending to Mrs.
Wharton in the good sense you mention. It will give her the greatest
pleasure and count enormously for her undertaking.

Yes, I daresay many Americans _will_ be shocked at my "step"; so many of
them appear in these days to be shocked at everything that is not a
reiterated blandishment and slobberation of Germany, with recalls of
ancient "amity" and that sort of thing, by our Government. I waited long
months, watch in hand, for the latter to show some sign of intermitting
these amiabilities to such an enemy--the very smallest would have
sufficed for me to throw myself back upon it. But it seemed never to
come, and the misrepresentation of _my_ attitude becoming at last to me
a thing no longer to be borne, I took action myself. It would really
have been _so_ easy for the U.S. to have "kept" (if they had cared to!)
yours all faithfully,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Wilfred Sheridan._


/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.
Aug. 7th, 1915.
*/

/*
Dearest Wilfred,
*/

I have a brave letter from you which is too many days old--and the
reason of that is that I became some fortnight ago a British subject.
You may perhaps not have been aware that I wasn't one--it showed, I
believe, so little; but I had in fact to do things, of no great
elaboration, to take on the character and testify to my fond passion for
the cause for which you are making so very much grander still a
demonstration; so that now at any rate civis Britannicus sum, and
there's no mistake about it. Well, the point is that this absolutely
natural and inevitable offer of my allegiance--a poor thing but my
own--and the amiable acceptance of it by the powers to which I applied,
have drawn down on my devoted head an avalanche of letters, the
friendliest and most welcoming, beneath which I still lie gasping. They
have unspeakably touched and justified me, but I brush them all aside
to-night, few of them as I have in proportion been able yet to answer,
in order to tell you that their effect upon me all together isn't a
patch on the pride and pleasure I have in hearing from _you_, and that I
find your ability to write to me, and your sweet care to do so, in your
fantastic conditions, the most wonderful and beautiful thing that has
ever happened. Dear and delightful to me is the gallant good humour of
your letter, which makes me take what you tell me as if I were quite
monstrously near you. One doesn't know what to say or do in presence of
the general and particular Irish perversity and unspeakability (as your
vivid page reflects it;) that is, rather, nobody knows, to any good
effect, but yourself--it makes _me_ so often ask if it isn't, when all's
said and done and it has extorted the tribute of our grin, much more
trouble than it's worth, or ever can be, and in short too, quite _too_,
finally damning and discouraging. However, I am willing it should
display its grace while you are there to give them, roundabout you, your
exquisite care, and I can fall back on my sense of your rare psychologic
intelligence. Your "Do write to me" goes to my heart, and your "I don't
think the Russian affair as bad as it seems" goes to my head--even if it
_now_ be seeming pretty bad to us here. But there's comfort in its
having apparently cost the enemy, damn his soul to hell, enormously, and
still being able to do so and to keep on leaving him not at all at his
ease. I believe in that vast sturdy people quand même--though heaven
save us all from cheap optimism. I scarce know what to say to you about
things "here," unless it be that I hold we are not really in the least
such fools as we mostly seem bent on appearing to the world, and that on
the day when we cease giving the most fantastic account of ourselves
possible by tongue and pen, on _that_ day there will be fairly something
the matter with us and we shall be false to our remarkably queer genius.
Our genius is, and ever has been, to insist _urbi et orbi_ that we live
by muddle, and by muddle only--while, all the while, our native
character is never _really_ abjuring its stoutness or its capacity for
action. We have been stout from the most ancient days, and are not a bit
less so than ever--only we should do better if we didn't give so much
time to writing to the papers that we are impossible and inexcusable.
That is, or seems to be, queerly connected with our genius for being _at
all_--so that at times I hope I shall never see it foregone: it's the
mantle over which the country truly forges its confidence and acts out
its faith. But the night wanes and the small hours are literally upon
me--their smallness even diminishes. I am sticking to town, as you
see--I find I don't yearn to eat my heart out, so to speak, all alone in
the Sussex sequestration. So I keep lending my little house at Rye to
friends and finding company in the mild hum of waterside Chelsea. The
hum of London is mild altogether, and the drop of the profane life
absolute--for I don't call the ceaseless and ubiquitous military
footfall (not football!) profane, and all this quarter of the town
simply bristles with soldiers and for the most part extremely
good-looking ones. I really think we must be roping them in in much
greater numbers than we allow when we write to the Times--otherwise I
don't know what we mean by so many. Goodnight, my dear, dear boy. I hope
you have harmonious news of Clare--her father has just welcomed me in
the most genial way to the national fold. I haven't lately written to
her, because in the conditions I have absolutely nothing to say to her
but that I feel her to be in perfection the warrior's bride--and she
knows that.

/*
Yours and hers, dearest Wilfred, all devotedly,

HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Edmund Gosse._


/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.
August 25th, 1915.
*/

/*
My dear Gosse,
*/

I have had a bad sick week, mostly in bed--with putting pen to paper
quite out of my power: otherwise I should sooner have thanked you for
the so generous spirit of that letter, and told you, with emotion, how
much it has touched me. I am really more overcome than I can say by
your having been able to indulge in such freedom of mind and grace of
speculation, during these dark days, on behalf of my poor old rather
truncated edition, in fact entirely frustrated one--which has the
grotesque likeness for me of a sort of miniature Ozymandias of Egypt
("look on my _works_, ye mighty, and despair!")--round which the lone
and level sands stretch further away than ever. It _is_ indeed
consenting to be waved aside a little into what was once blest
literature to so much as answer the question you are so handsomely
impelled to make--but my very statement about the matter can only be,
alas, a melancholy, a blighted confusion. That Edition has been, from
the point of view of profit either to the publishers or to myself,
practically a complete failure; vaguely speaking, it doesn't sell--that
is, my annual report of what it does--the whole 24 vols.--in this
country amounts to about £25 from the Macmillans; and the ditto from the
Scribners in the U.S. to very little more. I am past all praying for
anywhere; I remain at my age (which you know,) and after my long career,
utterly, insurmountably, unsaleable. And the original preparation of
that collective and selective series involved really the extremity of
labour--all my "earlier" things--of which the Bostonians would have
been, if included, one--were so intimately and interestingly revised.
The edition is from that point of view really a monument (like
Ozymandias) which has never had the least intelligent critical justice
done it--or any sort of critical attention at all paid it--and the
artistic problem involved in my scheme was a deep and exquisite one, and
moreover was, as I held, very effectively solved. Only it took such
time--_and_ such taste--in other words such aesthetic light. No more
commercially thankless job of the literary order was (Prefaces and
all--_they_ of a thanklessness!) accordingly ever achieved. The
immediate inclusion of the Bostonians was rather deprecated by the
publishers (the Scribners, who were very generally and in a high degree
appreciative: I make no complaint of them at all!)--and there were
reasons for which I also wanted to wait: we always meant that that work
should eventually come in. Revision of it loomed peculiarly formidable
and time-consuming (for intrinsic reasons,) and as other things were
more pressing and more promptly feasible I allowed it to stand
over--with the best intentions, and also in company with a small number
more of provisional omissions. But by this time it _had_ stood over,
disappointment had set in; the undertaking had begun to announce itself
as a virtual failure, and we stopped short where we were--that is when a
couple of dozen volumes were out. From that moment, some seven or eight
years ago, nothing whatever has been added to the series--and there is
little enough appearance now that there will ever. Your good impression
of the Bostonians greatly moves me--the thing was no success whatever on
publication in the Century (where it came out,) and the late R. W.
Gilder, of that periodical, wrote me at the time that they had never
published anything that appeared so little to interest their readers. I
felt about it myself then that it was probably rather a remarkable feat
of objectivity--but I never was very thoroughly happy about it, and seem
to recall that I found the subject and the material, after I had got
launched in it, under some illusion, less interesting and repaying than
I had assumed it to be. All the same I _should_ have liked to review it
for the Edition--it would have come out a much truer and more curious
thing (it was meant to be curious from the first;) but there can be no
question of that, or of the proportionate Preface to have been written
with it, at present--or probably ever within my span of life. Apropos
of which matters I at this moment hear from Heinemann that four or five
of my books that he has have quite (entirely) ceased to sell and that he
must break up the plates. Of course he must; I have nothing to say
against it; and the things in question are mostly all in the Edition.
But such is "success"! I should have liked to write that Preface to the
Bostonians--which will never be written now. But think of noting now
that _that_ is a thing that has perished!

I am doing my best to feel better, and hope to go out this afternoon the
first for several! I am exceedingly with you all over Philip's transfer
to France. We are with each other now as not yet before over everything
and I am yours and your wife's more than ever,

/*
H. J.
*/




_To Mrs. Wilfred Sheridan._

/#
     Lieut. Wilfred Sheridan, Rifle Brigade, fell in action at Loos,
     September 25, 1915.
#/


/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.
October 4th, 1915.
*/

/*
Dearest, dearest Clare,
*/

I have heard twice from your kindest of Fathers, and yet this goes to
you (for poor baffling personal reasons) with a dreadful belatedness.
The thought of coming into your presence, and into Mrs. Sheridan's, with
such wretched empty and helpless hands is in itself paralysing; and yet,
even as I say that, the sense of how my whole soul is full, even to its
being racked and torn, of Wilfred's belovedest image and the splendour
and devotion in which he is all radiantly wrapped and enshrined, [makes
me] ask myself if I don't really bring you something, of a sort, in thus
giving you the assurance of how absolutely I adored him! Yet who can
give you anything that approaches your incomparable sense that he was
yours, and you his, to the last possessed and possessing radiance of
him? I can't pretend to utter to you words of "consolation"--vainest of
dreams: for what is your suffering but the measure of his virtue, his
charm and his beauty?--everything we so loved him for. But I see you
marked with his glory too, and so intimately associated with his noble
legend, with the light of it about you, and about his children, always,
and the precious privilege of making him live again whenever one
approaches you; convinced as I am that you will rise, in spite of the
unspeakable laceration, to the greatness of all this and feel it carry
you in a state of sublime privilege. I had sight and some sound of him
during an hour of that last leave, just before he went off again; and
what he made me then feel, and what his face seemed to say, amid that
cluster of relatives in which I was the sole outsider (of which too I
was extraordinarily proud,) is beyond all expression. I don't know why I
presume to say such things--I mean poor things only of _mine_, to you,
all stricken and shaken as you are--and then again I know how any touch
of his noble humanity must be unspeakably dear to you, and that you'll
go on getting the fragrance of them wherever he passed. I think with
unutterable tenderness of those days of late last autumn when you were
in the little house off the Edgware Road, and the humour and gaiety and
vivid sympathy of his talk (about his then beginnings and conditions)
made me hang spellbound on his lips. But what memories are these not to
you, and how can one speak to you at all without stirring up the deeps?
Well we are all in them _with_ you, and with his mother--and may I
speak of his father?--and with his children, and we cling to you and
cherish you as never before. I live with you in thought every step of
the long way, and am yours, dearest Clare, all devotedly and sharingly,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Hugh Walpole._

/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.
Nov. 13th, 1915.
*/

...I take to my heart these blest Cornish words from you and thank you
for them as articulately as my poor old impaired state permits. It will
be an immense thing to see you when your own conditions permit of it,
and in that fond vision I hang on. I have been having a regular hell of
a summer and autumn (that is more particularly from the end of July:)
through the effect of a bad--an aggravated--heart-crisis, during the
first weeks of which I lost valuable time by attributing (under wrong
advice) my condition to mistaken causes; but I am in the best hands now
and apparently responding very well to very helpful treatment. But the
past year has made me feel twenty years older, and, frankly, as if my
knell had rung. Still, I cultivate, I at least attempt, a brazen front.
I shall not let that mask drop till I have heard _your_ thrilling story.
Do intensely believe that I respond clutchingly to your every grasp of
me, every touch, and would so gratefully be a re-connecting link with
you here--where I don't wonder that you're bewildered. (It will be
indeed, as far as I am concerned, the bewildered leading the
bewildered.) I have "seen" very few people--I see as few as possible, I
can't stand them, and all their promiscuous prattle, mostly; so that
those who have reported of me to you must have been peculiarly
vociferous. I deplore with all my heart your plague of boils and of
insomnia; I haven't known the former, but the latter, alas, is my own
actual portion. I think I shall know your rattle of the telephone as
soon as ever I shall hear it. Heaven speed it, dearest Hugh, and keep me
all fondestly yours,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/