LATER LONDON YEARS (1889-1897).



_To Robert Louis Stevenson._


34 De Vere Gardens, W.
April 29th, 1889.

This is really dreadful news, my dear Louis, odious news to one who had
neatly arranged that his coming August should be spent gobbling down
your yarns--by some garden-window of Skerryvore--as the Neapolitan
lazzarone puts away the lubricating filaments of the vermicelli. And
yet, with my hideous capacity to understand it, I am strong enough,
superior enough, to say _anything_, for conversation, later. It's in the
light of unlimited conversation that I see the future years, and my
honoured chair by the ingleside will require a succession of new
cushions. I miss you shockingly--for, my dear fellow, there is no
one--literally no one; and I don't in the least follow you--I can't go
with you (I mean in conceptive faculty and the "realising sense,") and
you are for the time absolutely as if you were dead to me--I mean to my
imagination of course--not to my affection or my prayers. And so I shall
keep humble that you may pump into me--and make me stare and sigh and
look simple and be quite out of it--for ever and ever. It's the best
thing that can happen to one to see it written in your very hand that
you have been so uplifted in health and cheer, and if another year will
screw you up so tight that you won't "come undone" again, I will try and
hold on through the barren months. I will go to Mrs. Sitwell, to hear
what has made you blush--it must be something very radical. Your
chieftains are dim to me--why shouldn't they be when you yourself are?
_Va_ for another year--but don't stay away longer, for we should really,
for self-defence, have to outlive [?] you.... I myself do little but sit
at home and write little tales--and even long ones--you shall see them
when you come back. Nothing would induce me, by sending them to you, to
expose myself to damaging Polynesian comparisons. For the rest, there is
nothing in this land but the eternal Irish strife--the place is all
gashed and gory with it. I can't tell you of it--I am too sick of
it--more than to say that two or three of the most interesting days I
ever passed were lately in the crowded, throbbing, thrilling little
court of the Special Commission, over the astounding drama of the forged
_Times_ letters.

I have a hope, a dream, that your mother may be coming home and that one
may go and drink deep of her narrations. But it's idle and improbable. A
wonderful, beautiful letter from your wife to Colvin seemed, a few
months ago, to make it clear that _she_ has no quarrel with your wild
and wayward life. I hope it agrees with her a little too--I mean that it
renews her youth and strength. It is a woeful time to wait--for your
prose as for your person--especially as the prose can't be better though
the person may.

Your very faithful
HENRY JAMES.




_To William James._


Hôtel de Hollande, Paris.
Nov. 28th, '89.

My dear William,

...I send you this from Paris, where I have been for the last five
weeks. Toward the end I relented in regard to the exhibition and came
over in time for the last fortnight of it. It was despoiled of its
freshness and invaded by hordes of furious Franks and fiery Huns--but it
was a great impression and I'm glad I sacrificed to it. So I've remained
on. I go back Dec. 1st. It happens that I have been working very hard
all this month--almost harder than ever in my life before--having on top
of other pressing and unfinished tasks undertaken, for the bribe of
large lucre, to translate Daudet's new _Tartarin_ novel for the
Harpers.... I had a talk of one hour and a half with him the other
day--about "our work" (!!) and his own queer, deplorable condition,
which he intensely converts into art, profession, success, copy,
etc.--taking perpetual notes about his constant suffering (terrible in
degree,) which are to make a book called _La Douleur_, the most detailed
and pessimistic notation of pain _qui fut jamais_. He is doing, in the
midst of this, his new, gay, lovely "Tartarin" for the Harpers _en
premier lieu_; that is, they are to publish it serially with wonderfully
"processed" drawings before it comes out as a book in France--and I am
to represent him, in English (a difficult, but with ingenuity a pleasant
and amusing task,) while this serial period lasts. I have seen a good
deal of Bourget, and as I have breakfasted with Coppée and twice dined
in company with Meilhac, Sarcey, Albert Wolff, Goncourt, Ganderax,
Blowitz, etc., you will judge that I am pretty well saturated and ought
to have the last word about ces gens-ci. That last word hasn't a grain
of subjection or of mystery left in it: it is simply, "Chinese, Chinese,
Chinese!" They are finished, besotted mandarins, and their Paris is
their celestial Empire. With that, such a Paris as it sometimes seems!
Nevertheless I've enjoyed it, and though I am very tired, too tired to
write to you properly, I shall have been much refreshed by my stay here,
and have taken aboard some light and heat for the black London
winter.... I hope that above house and college and life and everything
you still hold up an undemented head, and are not in a seedy way.

Ever your affectionate
HENRY.




_To Robert Louis Stevenson._

     Stevenson was now beginning to break to his friends at home the
     possibility that he might settle permanently in the South Seas; but
     he still projected a preliminary visit to England, or at least to
     Europe.


34 De Vere Gardens, W.
March 21st, 1890.

My dear Louis and my dear Mrs. Louis,

It comes over me with horror and shame that, within the next very few
months, your return to England may become such a reality that I shall
before long stand face to face with you branded with the almost
blood-guilt of my long silence. Let me break that silence then, before
the bliss of meeting you again (heaven speed the day) is qualified, in
prospect, by the apprehension of your disdain. I despatch these
incoherent words to Sydney, in the hope they may catch you before you
embark for our palpitating England. My despicable dumbness has been a
vile accident--I needn't assure you that it doesn't pretend to the
smallest backbone of system or sense. I have simply had the busiest year
of my life and have been so drained of the fluid of expression--so
tapped into the public pitcher--that my whole correspondence has dried
up and died of thirst. Then, somehow, you had become inaccessible to the
mind as well as to the body, and I had the feeling that, in the midst of
such desperate larks, any news of mine would be mere irrelevant drivel
to you. Now, however, you _must_ take it, such as it is. It won't, of
course, be news to you at all that the idea of your return has become
altogether the question of the day. The other two questions (the eternal
Irish and Rudyard Kipling) aren't in it. (We'll tell you all about
Rudyard Kipling--your nascent rival; he has killed one immortal--Rider
Haggard; the star of the hour, aged 24 and author of remarkable
Anglo-Indian and extraordinarily observed barrack life--Tommy
Atkins--tales.) What I am pledged to do at the present moment (pledged
to Colvin) is to plead with you passionately on the question of Samoa
and expatriation. But somehow, when it comes to the point, I can't do
it--partly because I can't really believe in anything so dreadful (a
long howl of horror has gone up from all your friends), and partly
because before any step so fatal is irretrievably taken we are to have a
chance to see you and bind you with flowery chains. When you tell me
with your own melodious lips that you're committed, I'll see what's to
be done; but I won't take a single plank of the house or a single hour
of the flight for granted. Colvin has given me instantly all your recent
unspeakable news--I mean the voyage to Samoa and everything preceding,
and your mother has kindly communicated to me her own wonderful
documents. Therefore my silence has been filled with sound--sound
infinitely fearful sometimes. But the joy of your health, my dear
Louis, has been to me as an imparted sensation--making me far more glad
than anything that I could originate with myself. I shall never be as
well as I am glad that you are well. We are poor tame, terrified
products of the tailor and the parlour-maid; but we have a fine
sentiment or two, all the same.... I, thank God, am in better form than
when you first took ship. I have lately finished the longest and most
careful novel I have ever written (it has gone 16 months in a
periodical) and the last, in that form, I shall ever do--it will come
out as a book in May. Also other things too flat to be bawled through an
Australasian tube. But the intensest throb of my literary life, as of
that of many others, has been the Master of Ballantrae--a pure hard
crystal, my boy, a work of ineffable and exquisite art. It makes us all
as proud of you as you can possibly be of _it_. Lead him on blushing,
lead him back blooming, by the hand, dear Mrs. Louis, and we will talk
over everything, as we used to lang syne at Skerryvore. When we _have_
talked over everything and when all your tales are told, then you may
paddle back to Samoa. But we shall call time. My heartiest greeting to
the young Lloyd--grizzled, I fear, before his day. I have been very
sorry to hear of your son-in-law's bad case. May all that tension be
over now. _Do_ receive this before you sail--_don't_ sail till you get
it. But then bound straight across. I send a volume of the Rising Star
to goad you all hither with jealousy. He has quite done for your
neglected even though neglectful friend,

HENRY JAMES.




_To Robert Louis Stevenson._


34 De Vere Gardens, W.
April 28th, '90.

My dear Louis,

I didn't, for two reasons, answer your delightful letter, or rather
exquisite note, from the Sydney Club, but I must thank you for it now,
before the gulfs have washed you down, or at least have washed away from
you all after-tastes of brineless things--the stay-at-home works of
lubberly friends. One of the reasons just mentioned was that I had
written to you at Sydney (c/o the mystic Towns,) only a few days before
your note arrived; the other is that until a few days ago I hugged the
soft illusion that by the time anything else would reach you, you would
already have started for England. This fondest of hopes of all of us has
been shattered in a manner to which history furnishes a parallel only in
the behaviour of its most famous coquettes and courtesans. You are
indeed the male Cleopatra or buccaneering Pompadour of the Deep--the
wandering Wanton of the Pacific. You swim into our ken with every
provocation and prospect--and we have only time to open our arms to
receive you when your immortal back is turned to us in the act of still
more provoking flight. The moral is that we have to be virtuous whether
we like it or no. Seriously, it was a real heart-break to have September
substituted for June; but I have a general faith in the fascinated
providence who watches over you, to the neglect of all other human
affairs--I believe that even _He_ has an idea that you know what you are
about, and even what _He_ is, though He by this time doesn't in the
least know himself. Moreover I have selfish grounds of resignation in
the fact that I shall be in England in September, whereas, to my almost
intolerable torment, I should probably not have been in June. Therefore
when you come, if you ever do, which in my heart of hearts I doubt, I
shall see you in all your strange exotic bloom, in all your paint and
beads and feathers. May you grow a magnificent extra crop of all such
things (as they will bring you a fortune here,) in this much grudged
extra summer. Charming and delightful to me to see you with a palate for
_my_ plain domestic pudding, after all the wild cannibal smacks that you
have learned to know. I think the better of the poor little study in the
painfully-familiar, since hearing that it could bear such voyages and
resist such tests. You have fed a presumption that vaguely stirs within
me--that of trying to get at you in June or July with a fearfully
long-winded but very highly-finished novel which I am putting forth in
(probably) the last days of May. If I were sure it would overtake you on
some coral strand I shouldn't hesitate; for, seriously and selfishly
speaking, I can't (spiritually) afford _not_ to put the book under the
eye of the sole and single Anglo-saxon capable of perceiving--though he
may care for little else in it--how well it is written. So I shall
probably cast it upon the waters and pray for it; as I suppose you are
coming back to Sydney, it may meet you there, and you can read it on the
voyage home. In that box you'll _have_ to. I don't say it to bribe you
in advance to unnatural tolerance--but I have an impression that I
didn't make copious or clear to you in my last what a grand literary
life your Master of B. has been leading here. Somehow, a miracle has
been wrought for you (for you they are,) and the fine old feather-bed of
English taste _has_ thrilled with preternatural recognitions. The most
unlikely number of people _have_ discerned that the Master is "well
written." It has had the highest success of honour that the
English-reading public can now confer; where it has failed (the
success, save that it hasn't failed at all!) it has done so through the
constitutional incapacity of the umpire--infected, by vulgar
intercourses, as with some unnameable disease. We have lost our
status--_nous n'avons plus qualité_--to confer degrees. Nevertheless,
last year you woke us up at night, for an hour--and we scrambled down in
our shirt and climbed a garden-wall and stole a laurel, which we have
been brandishing ever since over your absent head. I tell you this
because I think Colvin (at least it was probably he--he is visibly
better--or else Mrs. Sitwell) mentioned to me the other day that you had
asked in touching virginal ignorance for news of the fate of the book.
Its "fate," my dear fellow, has been glittering glory--simply: and I
ween--that is I hope--you will find the glitter has chinked as well. I
sent you a new Zola the other day--at a venture: but I have no
confidence that I gratified a curiosity. I haven't read The Human
Beast--one knows him without that--and I am told Zola's account of him
is dull and imperfect. I would read anything new about him--but this is
old, old, old. I hope your pen, this summer, will cleave the deeps of
art even as your prow, or your keel, or whatever's the knowing name for
it, furrows the Pacific flood. Into what strange and wondrous dyes you
must be now qualified to dip it! Roast yourself, I beseech you, on the
sharp spit of perfection, that you may give out your aromas and
essences! Tell your wife, please, to read between the lines of this, and
between the words and the letters, all that I miss the occasion to write
directly to _her_. I hope she has continued to distil, to your mother,
the honey of those impressions of which a few months ago the latter lent
me for a day or two a taste--on its long yellow foolscap combs. They
would make, they _will_ make, of course, a deliciously sweet book. I
hope Lloyd, whom I greet and bless, is living up to the height of his
young privilege--and secreting honey too, according to the mild
discipline of the hive. There are lots of things more to tell you, no
doubt, but if I go on they will all take the shape of questions, and
that won't be fair. The supreme thing to say is Don't, oh _don't_,
simply ruin our nerves and our tempers for the rest of life by _not_
throwing the rope in September, to him who will, for once in his life,
not muff his catch:

H.J.




_To William James._

     The project guardedly referred to in this letter was that of
     writing a series of plays. He had already finished the
     dramatisation of _The American_.


Hôtel de la Ville, Milan.
May 16th, 1890.

My dear William,

...I have been both very busy and very bent on getting away this year
without fail, for a miracle, from the oppressive London season. I have
just accomplished it; I passed the St. Gotthard day before yesterday,
and I hope to find it possible to remain absent till August 1st. After
that I am ready to pay cheerfully and cheaply for my journey by staying
quietly in town for August and September, in the conditions in which you
saw me last year. I shall take as much as possible of a holiday, for I
have been working carefully, consecutively and unbrokenly for a very
long time past--turning out one thing (always "highly finished") after
another. However, I _like_ to work, thank heaven, and at the end of a
month's privation of it I sink into gloom and discomfort--so that I
shall probably not wholly "neglect my pen".... I hope you will have
received promptly a copy of _The Tragic Muse_, though I am afraid I sent
my list to the publishers a little late. I don't in the least know,
however, when the book is supposed to come out. I have no opinion or
feeling about it now--though I took long and patient and careful trouble
(which no creature will recognise) with it at the time: too much, no
doubt: for my mind is now a muddled, wearied blank on the subject. I
have shed and ejected it--it's void and dead--and my feeling as to what
may become of it is reduced to the sordid hope it will make a little
money--which it won't.... The matter you expressed a friendly hope about
the success of, and which for all sorts of reasons I desire to be
extremely secret, silent and mysterious about--I mean the enterprise I
covertly mentioned to you as conceived by me with a religious and
deliberate view of gain over a greater scale than the Book (my Books at
least) can ever approach bringing in to me: this matter is on a good and
promising footing, but it is too soon to say anything about it, save
that I am embarked in it seriously and with rather remarkably good
omens. By which I mean that it is not to depend on a single attempt, but
on half a dozen of the most resolute and scientific character, which I
find I am abundantly capable of making, but which, alas, in the light of
this discovery, I become conscious that I ought to have made ten years
ago. I was then discouraged all round, while a single word of
encouragement would have made the difference. Now it is late. But on the
other hand the thing would have been then only an experiment more or
less like another--whereas now it's an absolute necessity, imposing
itself without choice if I wish a loaf on the shelf for my old age.
Fortunately as far as it's gone it announces itself well--but I can't
tell you yet how far that is. The only thing is to do a great lot.

By the time this reaches you I suppose your wife and children will have
gone to recline under the greenwood tree. I hope their gentle outlawry
will be full of comfort for them. It's poor work to me writing about
them without ever seeing them. But my interest in them is deep and
large, and please never omit to give my great love to them: to Alice
first in the lump, to be broken up and distributed by her. May you
squeeze with a whole skin through the tight weeks of the last of the
term--may you live to rest and may you rest to live. I shall not, I
think, soon again write to you so rarely as for the last year. This will
be partly because _The Tragic Muse_ is to be my last long novel. For the
rest of my life I hope to do lots of short things with irresponsible
spaces between. I see even a great future (ten years) of such. But they
won't make money. Excuse (you probably rather will esteem) the sordid
tone of your affectionate

HENRY JAMES.




_To W. D. Howells._


Hôtel de la Ville, Milan.
May 17th, 1890.

My dear Howells,

I have been not writing to you at a tremendous, an infamous rate, for a
long time past; but I should indeed be sunk in baseness if I were to
keep this pace after what has just happened. For what has just happened
is that I have been reading the _Hazard of New Fortunes_ (I confess I
should have liked to change the name for you,) and that it has filled me
with communicable rapture. I remember that the last time I came to Italy
(or almost,) I brought your Lemuel Barker, which had just come out, to
read in the train, and let it divert an intense professional eye from
the most clamourous beauties of the way--writing to you afternoons from
this very place, I think, all the good and all the wonder I thought of
it. So I have a decent precedent for insisting to you, now, under
circumstances exactly similar (save that the present book is a much
bigger feat,) that, to my charmed and gratified sense, the _Hazard_ is
simply prodigious.... I should think it would make you as happy as poor
happiness will let us be, to turn off from one year to the other, and
from a reservoir in daily domestic use, such a free, full, rich flood.
In fact your reservoir deluges me, altogether, with surprise as well as
other sorts of effusion; by which I mean that though you do much to
empty it you keep it remarkably full. I seem to myself, in comparison,
to fill mine with a teaspoon and obtain but a trickle. However, I don't
mean to compare myself with you or to compare you, in the particular
case, with anything but life. When I do that--with the life you see and
represent--your faculty for representing it seems to me extraordinary
and to shave the truth--the general truth you aim at--several degrees
closer than anyone else begins to do. You are less _big_ than Zola, but
you are ever so much less clumsy and more really various, and moreover
you and he don't see the same things--you have a wholly different
consciousness--_you_ see a totally different side of a different race.
Man isn't at all _one_ after all--it takes so much of him to be
American, to be French, &c. I won't even compare you with something I
have a sort of dim stupid sense you might be and are not--for I don't in
the least know that you might be it, after all, or whether, if you were,
you wouldn't cease to be that something you are which makes me write to
you thus. We don't know what people might give us that they don't--the
only thing is to take them on what they do and to allow them absolutely
and utterly their conditions. This alone, for the tastes, secures
freedom of enjoyment. I apply the rule to you, and it represents a
perfect triumph of appreciation; because it makes me accept, largely,
all your material from you--an absolute gain when I consider that I
should never take it from myself. I note certain things which make me
wonder at your form and your fortune (e.g.--as I have told you
before--the fatal colour in which they let _you_, because you live at
home--is it?--paint American life; and the fact that there's a whole
quarter of the heaven upon which, in the matter of composition, you seem
consciously--_is_ it consciously?--to have turned your back;) but these
things have no relevancy whatever as grounds of dislike--simply because
you communicate so completely _what_ you undertake to communicate. The
novelist is a particular _window_, absolutely--and of worth in so far as
he is one; and it's because you open so well and are hung so close over
the street that I could hang out of it all day long. Your very value is
that you choose your own street--heaven forbid I should have to choose
it for you. If I should say I mortally dislike the people who pass in
it, I should seem to be taking on myself that intolerable responsibility
of selection which it is exactly such a luxury to be relieved of. Indeed
I'm convinced that no readers above the rank of an idiot--this number is
moderate, I admit--really fail to take any view that is really _shown_
them--any gift (of subject) that's really given. The usual imbecility of
the novel is that the showing and giving simply don't come off--the
reader never touches the subject and the subject never touches the
reader; the window is no window at all--but only childish _finta_, like
the ornaments of our beloved Italy. This is why, as a triumph of
_communication_, I hold the _Hazard_ so rare and strong. You communicate
in touches so close, so fine, so true, so droll, so frequent. I am
writing too much (you will think me demented with chatter;) so that I
can't go into specifications of success....

I continue to scribble, though with relaxed continuity while abroad; but
I can't talk to you about it. One thing only is clear, that henceforth I
must do, or half do, England in fiction--as the place I see most today,
and, in a sort of way, know best. I have at last more acquired notions
of it, on the whole, than of any other world, and it will serve as well
as any other. It has been growing distincter that America fades from me,
and as she never trusted me at best, I can trust _her_, for effect, no
longer. Besides I can't be doing _de chic_, from here, when you, on the
spot, are doing so brilliantly the _vécu_....




_To Miss Alice James._

     The play which H. J. had given his sister to read was the dramatic
     version of _The American_. It had now been accepted for production
     by Edward Compton, who was to play the part of Christopher Newman.
     Some intentional and humorous exaggeration, it ought perhaps to be
     mentioned, enters into H. J.'s constant appeal for discreet silence
     in these matters. As for the projected excursion with Mr. and Mrs.
     Curtis, he eventually went with them the whole way, and saw the
     Passion Play at Oberammergau.


Palazzo Barbaro, Venice.
June 6th [1890].

Dearest Sister,

I am ravished by your letter after reading the play (keep it locked up,
safe and secret, though there are three or four copies in existence)
which makes me feel as if there had been a triumphant première and I had
received overtures from every managerial quarter and had only to count
my gold. At any rate I am delighted that you have been struck with it
exactly as I have tried to strike, and that the pure practical character
of the effort has worked its calculated spell upon you. For what
encourages me in the whole business is that, as the piece stands, there
is not, in its felicitous form, the ghost of a "fluke" or a mere chance:
it is all "art" and an absolute address of means to the end--the end,
viz., of meeting exactly the immediate, actual, intense British
conditions, both subjective and objective, and of acting in (to a
minute, including entr'actes) 2 hours and 3/4. Ergo, I can do a dozen
more infinitely better; and I am excited to think how much, since the
writing of this one piece has been an education to me, a little further
experience will do for me. Also I am sustained by the sense, on the
whole, that though really superior acting would help it immensely, yet
mediocrity of handling (which is all, at the best, I am pretty sure,
that it will get) won't and can't kill it, and that there may be even
something sufficiently general and human about it, to make it (given its
eminent actability) "keep the stage," even after any first vogue it may
have had has passed away. That fate--in the poverty-stricken condition
of the English repertory--would mean profit indeed, and an income to my
descendants. But one mustn't talk of this kind of thing yet. However,
since you have been already so deeply initiated, I think I will enclose
(keep it sacredly for me) an admirable letter I have just received from
the precious Balestier in whose hands, as I wrote you, I placed the
settlement of the money-question, the terms of the writing agreement
with Compton. Compton saw him on Monday last--and I send the letter
mainly to illustrate the capital intelligence and competence of
Balestier and show you in what good hands I am. He will probably strike
you, as he strikes me, as the perfection of an "agent"--especially when
you consider that he has undertaken this particular job out of pure
friendship. Everything, evidently, will be well settled--on the basis,
of course, which can't be helped, of production in London only about
the middle of next year. But by that time I hope to have done a good bit
more work--and I shall be beguiled by beginning to follow, in the
autumn, the rehearsals for the country production. Keep Balestier's
letter till I come back--I shall get another one from him in a day or
two with the agreement to sign.... These castles in Spain are at least
exhilarating: in a certain sense I should like you very much to
communicate to William your good impression of the drama--but on the
whole I think you had better not, for the simple reason that it is very
important it shouldn't be talked about (especially so long) in
advance--and it wouldn't be safe, inasmuch as every whisper gets into
the papers--and in some fearfully vulgarized and perverted form. You
might hint to William that you have read the piece under seal of secresy
to me and think so-and-so of it--but are so bound (to me) not to give a
sign that he must bury what you tell him in tenfold mystery. But I doubt
if even this would be secure--it would be in the _Transcript_ the next
week.

Venice continues adorable and the Curtises the soul of benevolence.
Their upstairs apartment (empty and still unoffered--at forty pounds a
year--to any one but me) beckons me so, as a foot-on-the-water here,
that if my dramatic ship had begun to come in, I should probably be
tempted to take it at a venture--for all it would matter. But for the
present I resist perfectly--especially as Venice isn't all advantageous.
The great charm of such an idea is the having, in Italy, a little cheap
and private refuge independent of hotels etc., which every year grow
more disagreeable and German and tiresome to face--not to say dearer
too. But it won't be for this year--and the Curtises won't let it. What
Pen Browning has done here ... with the splendid Palazzo Rezzonico,
transcends description for the beauty, and, as Ruskin would say,
"wisdom and rightness" of it. It is altogether royal and imperial--but
"Pen" isn't kingly and the _train de vie_ remains to be seen. Gondoliers
ushering in friends from pensions won't fill it out.... I am thinking,
after all, of joining the Curtises in the evidently most beautiful drive
(of upwards of a week, with rests) they are starting upon on the 14th,
from a place called Vittorio, in the Venetian Alps, two hours rail from
here, through Cadore, Titian's country, the Dolomites etc., toward
Oberammergau. They offer me pressingly the fourth seat in the carriage
that awaits them when they leave the train--and also an extra ticket
they have taken for the play at Oberammergau, if I choose to go so far.
This I shall scarcely do, but I shall probably leave with them, drive 4
or 5 days and come back, via Verona, by rail--leaving my luggage here.
Continue to address here--unless, before that, I give you one other
address while I am gone. I shall find all letters here, on my return, if
I do go, in the keeping of the excellent _maestro di casa_--the Venetian
Smith. I should be back, at the latest, by the 25th--probably by the
20th. In this case I shall presumably go back to Florence to spend 4 or
5 days with Baldwin (going to Siena or Perugia;) after which I have a
dream of going to Vallombrosa (nearly 4000 feet above the sea--but of a
softness!) for 2 or 3 weeks--till I have to leave Italy on my way home.
I am writing to Edith Peruzzi, who has got a summer-lodge there, and is
already there, for information about the inn. If I don't go there I
shall perhaps try Camaldoli or San Marcello--all high in the violet
Apennines, within 3 or 4 hours, and mainly by a little carriage, of
Florence. But I want to compass Vallombrosa, which I have never seen and
have always dreamed of and which I am assured is divine--infinitely
salubrious and softly cool. The idea of lingering in Italy a few weeks
longer on these terms is very delightful to me--it does me, as yet,
nothing but good. But I shall see. I put B.'s letter in another
envelope. I rejoiced in your eight gallops; they may be the dozen now.

Ever your HENRY.




_To William James._


Paradisino, Vallombrosa, Tuscany.
July 23rd, 1890.

My dear Brother,

I had from you some ten days ago a most delightful letter written just
after the heroic perusal of my interminable novel--which, according to
your request, I sent off almost too precipitately to Alice, so that I
haven't it here to refer to. But I don't need to "refer" to it, inasmuch
as it has plunged me into a glow of satisfaction which is far, as yet,
from having faded. I can only thank you tenderly for seeing so much good
in the clumsy thing--as I thanked your Alice, who wrote me a most lovely
letter, a week or two ago. I have no illusions of any kind about the
book, and least of all about its circulation and "popularity." From
these things I am quite divorced and never was happier than since the
dissolution has been consecrated by (what seems to me) the highest
authorities. One must go one's way and know what one's about and have a
general plan and a private religion--in short have made up one's mind as
to _ce qui en est_ with a public the draggling after which simply leads
one in the gutter. One has always a "public" enough if one has an
audible vibration--even if it should only come from one's self. I shall
never make my fortune--nor anything like it; but--I know what I shall
do, and it won't be bad.--I am lingering on late in Italy, as you see,
so as to keep away from London till August 1st or thereabouts. (I stay
in this exquisite spot till that date.) I shall then, returning to my
normal occupations, have had the best and clearest and pleasantest
holiday of three months, that I have had for many a day. I have been
accompanied on this occasion by a literary irresponsibility which has
caused me to enjoy Italy perhaps more than ever before;--let alone that
I have never before been perched (more than three thousand feet in the
air) in so perfect a paradise as this unspeakable Vallombrosa. It is
Milton's Vallombrosa, the original of his famous line, the site of the
old mountain monastery which he visited and which stands still a few
hundred feet below me as I write, "suppressed" and appropriated some
time ago by the Italian Government, who have converted it to the State
school of "Forestry." This little inn--the Paradisino, as it is called,
on a pedestal of rock overhanging the violet abysses like the prow of a
ship, is the Hermitage (a very comfortable one) of the old convent. The
place is extraordinarily beautiful and "sympathetic," the most romantic
mountains and most admirable woods--chestnut and beech and magnificent
pine-forests, the densest, coolest shade, the freshest, sweetest air and
the most enchanting views. It is full 20 years since I have done
anything like so much wandering through dusky woods and lying with a
book on warm, breezy hillsides. It has given me a sense of summer which
I had lost in so many London Julys; given me almost the summer of one's
childhood back again. I shall certainly come back here for other Julys
and other Augusts--and I hate to go away now. May you, and all of you,
these weeks, have as sweet, or half as sweet, an impression of the
natural universe as yours affectionately,

HENRY JAMES.




_To Edmund Gosse._

     The "ordeal" was the first night of _The American_, produced by
     Edward Compton and his company at Southport in anticipation of its
     eventual appearance in London.


Prince of Wales Hotel,
Southport.

Jan. 3rd [1891].

My dear Gosse,

I am touched by your _petit mot_. De gros mots seem to me to be so much
more applicable to my fallen state. The only thing that can be said for
it is that it is not so low as it may perhaps be to-morrow--after the
vulgar ordeal of to-night. Let me therefore profit by the few remaining
hours of a recognizable _status_ to pretend to an affectionate
reciprocity. I am yours and your wife's while yet I _may_ be. After 11
o'clock to-night I _may_ be the world's--you know--and I may be the
undertaker's. I count upon you both to spend this evening in fasting,
silence and supplication. I will send you a word in the morning--wire
you if I can--if there is anything at all to boast of. My hopes rest
solely on intrinsic charms--the adventitious graces of art are not "in
it." I am so nervous that I miswrite and misspell. Pity your infatuated
but not presumptuous friend,

HENRY JAMES.

P.S. It would have been delightful--and terrible--if you had been able
to come. I believe Archer is to come.

P.P.S. I don't return straight to London--don't get there till Tuesday
or Wednesday. I shall have to wait and telegraph you which evening I can
come in.




_To Mrs. Hugh Bell._


34 De Vere Gardens, W.
Jan. 8th [1891].

Dear Mrs. Bell,

Your most kind gratulatory note deserved an answer more gratefully
prompt than this. But I extended my absence from town to a short visit
at Cheltenham, and the whole thing was virtually, till yesterday, a
complete extinction of leisure. Delightful of you to want "details." I
think, if I were to inflict them on you, they would all be illustrative
of the cheering and rewarding side of our feverish profession. The
passage from knock-kneed nervousness (the night of the _première_, as
one clings, in the wing, to the curtain rod, as to the _pied des
autels_) to a simmering serenity is especially life-saving in its
effect. I flung myself upon Compton after the 1st act: "In heaven's
name, is it _going_?" "Going?--Rather! You could hear a pin drop!" Then,
after that, one felt it--one _heard_ it--one blessed it--and, at the end
of all, one (after a decent and discreet delay) simpered and gave
oneself up to _courbettes_ before the curtain, while the applausive
house emitted agreeable sounds from a kind of gas-flaring
indistinguishable dimness and the gratified Compton publicly pressed
one's hand and one felt that, really, as far as Southport could testify
to the circumstance, the stake was won. Of course it's only
Southport--but I have larger hopes, inasmuch as it was just the meagre
provincial conditions and the limited provincial interpretation that
deprived the performance of all adventitious aid. And when my hero and
heroine and another friend supped with me at the inn after the battle, I
felt that they were really as radiant as if we were carousing among the
slain. They _seem_ indeed wondrous content. The great feature of the
evening was the way Compton "came out" beyond what he had done or
promised at rehearsal, and acted really most interestingly and
admirably--if not a "revelation" at any rate a very jolly surprise. His
part is one in which I surmise he really counts upon making a large
success--and though I say it who shouldn't, it is one of incontestable
opportunities. However, all this is to come--and we stumble in judgment.
Amen. Voilà, ma chère amie. You have been through all this, and more,
and will tolerate my ingenuities....

All merriment to _your_ "full house."

Yours most truly,
HENRY JAMES.




_To Robert Louis Stevenson._


34 De Vere Gardens, W.
January 12th, 1891.

My dear Louis,

I have owed you a letter too shamefully long--and now that I have taken
my pen in hand, as we used to say, I feel how much I burn to communicate
with you. As your magnanimity will probably have forgotten how long ago
it was that you addressed me, from Sydney, the tragic statement of your
permanent secession I won't remind you of so detested a date. That
statement, indeed, smote me to the silence I have so long preserved: I
couldn't--I didn't protest; I even mechanically and grimly assented; but
I couldn't _talk_ about it--even to you and your wife. Missing you is
always a perpetual ache--and aches are disqualifying for gymnastic
feats. In short we forgive you (the Muses and the soft Passions forgive
_us_!) but we can't quite _treat_ you as if we did. However, all this
while I have many things to thank you for. In the first place for Lloyd.
He was delightful, we loved him--nous nous l'arrachâmes. He is a most
sympathetic youth, and we revelled in his rich conversation and
exclaimed on his courtly manners. How vulgar you'll think us all when
you come back (there is malice in that "when.") Then for the beautiful
strange things you sent me and which make for ever in my sky-parlour a
sort of dim rumble as of the Pacific surf. My heart beats over them--my
imagination throbs--my eyes fill. I have covered a blank wall of my
bedroom with an acre of painted cloth and feel as if I lived in a Samoan
tent--and I have placed the sad sepia-drawing just where, 50 times a
day, it most transports and reminds me. To-day what I am grateful for is
your new ballad-book, which has just reached me by your command. I have
had time only to read the first few things--but I shall absorb the rest
and give you my impression of them before I close this. As I turn the
pages I seem to see that they are full of charm and of your "Protean"
imaginative life--but above all of your terrible far-off-ness. My state
of mind about that is of the strangest--a sort of delight at having you
poised there in the inconceivable; and a miserable feeling, at the same
time, that I am in too wretched a back seat to assist properly at the
performance. I don't want to lose _any_ of your vibrations; and, as it
is, I feel that I only catch a few of them--and that is a constant woe.
I read with unrestrictive relish the first chapters of your prose volume
(kindly vouchsafed me in the little copyright-catching red volume,) and
I loved 'em and blessed them quite. But I _did_ make one restriction--I
missed the _visible_ in them--I mean as regards people, things, objects,
faces, bodies, costumes, features, gestures, manners, the introductory,
the _personal_ painter-touch. It struck me that you either didn't
feel--through some accident--your responsibility on this article quite
enough; or, on some theory of your own, had declined it. No theory is
kind to us that cheats us of _seeing_. However, no doubt we shall rub
our eyes for satiety before we have done. Of course the
pictures--Lloyd's blessed photographs--y sont pour beaucoup; but I
wanted more the note of portraiture. Doubtless I am greedy--but one _is_
when one dines at the Maison d'or. I have an idea you take but a
qualified interest in "Beau Austin"--or I should tell you how
religiously I was present at that memorable première. Lloyd and your
wonderful and delightful mother will have given you the agreeable facts
of the occasion. I found it--not the occasion, so much, but the
work--full of _quality_, and stamped with a charm; but on the other hand
seeming to shrug its shoulders a little too much at scenic precautions.
I have an idea, however, you don't care about the matter, and I won't
bore you with it further than to say that the piece has been repeatedly
played, that it has been the only honourable affair transacted dans
notre sale tripot for many a day--and that Wm. Archer _en raffole_
periodically in the "World." Don't despise me too much if I confess that
_anch' io son pittore_. Je fais aussi du théâtre, moi; and am doing it,
to begin with, for reasons too numerous to burden you with, but all
excellent and practical. In the provinces I had the other night, at
Southport, Lancashire, with the dramatization of an early novel--_The
American_--a success dont je rougis encore. This thing is to be played
in London only after several months--and to make the tour of the British
Islands first. Don't be hard on me--simplifying and chastening necessity
has laid its brutal hand on me and I have had to try to make somehow or
other the money I don't make by literature. My books don't sell, and it
looks as if my plays might. Therefore I am going with a brazen front to
write half a dozen. I have, in fact, already written two others than the
one just performed; and the success of the latter pronounced--really
_pronounced_--will probably precipitate them. I am glad for all this
that you are not here. Literature is out of it. I miss no occasion of
talking of you. Colvin I tolerably often see: I expect to do so for
instance to-night, at a decidedly too starched dining-club to which we
both belong, of which Lord Coleridge is president and too many persons
of the type of Sir Theodore Martin are members. Happy islanders--with no
Sir Theodore Martin. On Mrs. Sitwell I called the other day, in a
charming new habitat: all clean paint and fresh chintz. We always go on
at a great rate about you--celebrate rites as faithful as the early
Christians in the catacombs....

January 13th.--I met Colvin last night, after writing the above--in the
company of Sir James Stephen, Sir Theo. Martin, Sir Douglas Galton, Sir
James Paget, Sir Alfred Lyall, Canon Ainger, and George du Maurier. How
this will make you lick your chops over Ori and Rahiro and Tamatia and
Taheia--or whatever ces messieurs et ces dames, your present visiting
list, are called. He told me of a copious diary-letter he has just got
from you, bless you, and we are discussing a day on which I shall soon
come to meat or drink with him and listen to the same. Since yesterday I
have also read the ballad book--with the admiration that I always feel
as a helplessly verseless creature (it's a sentiment worth nothing as a
testimony) for all performances in rhyme and metre--especially on the
part of producers of fine prose.

January 19th.--I stopped this more than a week ago, and since then I
have lacked time to go on with it--having been out of town for several
days on a base theatrical errand--to see my tribute to the vulgarest of
the muses a little further on its way over the provincial circuit and
re-rehearse two or three portions of it that want more effective
playing. Thank heaven I shall have now no more direct contact with it
till it is produced in London next October.--I broke off in the act of
speaking to you about your ballad-book. The production of ringing and
lilting verse (by a superior proser) always does _bribe_ me a
little--and I envy you in that degree yours; but apart from this I
grudge your writing the like of these ballads. They show your
"cleverness," but they don't show your genius. I should say more if it
were not odious to a man of my refinement to write to you--so
expectantly far away--in remonstrance. I don't find, either, that the
cannibalism, the savagery _se prête_, as it were--one wants either less
of it, on the ground of suggestion--or more, on the ground of statement;
and one wants more of the high impeccable (as distinguished from the
awfully jolly,) on the ground of poetry. Behold I _am_ launching across
the black seas a page that may turn nasty--but my dear Louis, it's only
because I love so your divine prose and want the comfort of it. Things
are various because we do 'em. We mustn't do 'em because they're
various. The only news in literature here--such is the virtuous vacancy
of our consciousness--continues to be the infant monster of a Kipling. I
enclose, in this, for your entertainment a few pages I have lately
written about him, to serve as the preface to an (of course authorized)
American _recueil_ of some of his tales. I may add that he has just put
forth his longest story yet--a thing in Lippincott which I also send you
herewith--which cuts the ground somewhat from under my feet, inasmuch as
I find it the most youthfully infirm of his productions (in spite of
great "life,") much wanting in composition and in narrative and
explicative, or even implicative, art.

Please tell your wife, with my love, that all this is constantly
addressed to her also. I try to see you all, in what I fear is your
absence of habits, as you live, grouped around what I also fear is in
no sense the domestic hearth. Where do you go when you want to be
"cosy"?--or what at least do you _do_? You think a little, I hope, of
the faithful forsaken on whose powers of evocation, as well as of
attachment, you impose such a strain. I wish I could send a man from
Fortnum and Mason's out to you with a chunk of _mortadella_. I am trying
to do a series of "short things" and will send you the least bad. I mean
to write to Lloyd. Please congratulate your heroic mother for me very
cordially when she leaps upon your strand, and believe that I hold you
all in the tenderest remembrance of yours ever, my dear Louis,

HENRY JAMES.




_To William James._


34 De Vere Gardens, W.
Feb. 6th, 1891.

My dear William,

Bear with me that I haven't written to you, since my last, in which I
promised you a better immediate sequel, till the receipt of your note of
the 21st, this a.m., recalls me to decency. Bear with me indeed, in this
and other ways, so long as I am in the fever of dramatic production with
which I am, very sanely and practically, trying to make up for my late
start and all the years during which I have _not_ dramatically produced,
and, further, to get well ahead with the "demand" which I--and others
for me--judge (still very sanely and sensibly) to be _certain_ to be
made upon me from the moment I have a _London_, as distinguished from a
provincial success. (You can form no idea--outside--of how a provincial
success is confined to the provinces.) Now that I have tasted blood,
c'est une rage (of determination to _do_, and triumph, on my part,) for
I feel at last as if I had found my _real_ form, which I am capable of
carrying far, and for which the pale little art of fiction, as I have
practised it, has been, for me, but a limited and restricted substitute.
The strange thing is that I always, universally, knew _this_ was my more
characteristic form--but was kept away from it by a half-modest,
half-exaggerated sense of the difficulty (that is, I mean the practical
odiousness) of the conditions. But now that I have accepted them and met
them, I see that one isn't at all, needfully, their victim, but is, from
the moment one is anything, one's self, worth speaking of, their
_master_; and may use them, command them, squeeze them, lift them up and
better them. As for the form _itself_, its honour and inspiration are (à
défaut d'autres) in its difficulty. If it were easy to write a good play
I couldn't and wouldn't think of it; but it is in fact damnably hard (to
this truth the paucity of the article--in the English-speaking
world--testifies,) and that constitutes a solid
respectability--guarantees one's _intellectual_ self-respect. At any
rate I am working hard and constantly--and am just attacking my 4th!...

No. 4 has a destination which it would be premature to disclose; and, in
general, please breathe no word of these confidences, as publicity blows
on such matters in an injurious and deflowering way, and interests too
great to be hurt are at stake. I make them, the confidences, because it
isn't fair to myself not to let you know that I may be absorbed for some
months to come--as long as my present fit of the "rage" lasts--to a
degree which may be apparent in my correspondence--I mean in its
intermittence and in my apparent lapse of attention to, or appreciation
of, other things. For instance, I blush to say that I haven't had
freedom of mind or cerebral freshness (I find the drama much more
_obsédant_ than the novel) to tackle--more than dipping in just here
and there--your mighty and magnificent book, which requires a stretch of
leisure and an absence of "crisis" in one's own egotistical little
existence. As this is essentially a year of crisis, or of epoch-making,
for me, I shall probably save up the great volumes till I can recline
upon roses, the fruits of my production fever, and imbibe them like sips
of sherbet, giving meanwhile all my cerebration to the condensation of
masterpieces....

Farewell, dear William, and bear with my saw-dust and orange-peel phase
till the returns begin to flow in. The only hitch in the prospect is
that it takes so long to "realise." _The American_, in the country,
played only on Friday nights, with the very low country prices, gives me
nothing as yet to speak of--my royalty making only about £5-0-0 for each
performance. Later all this may be thoroughly counted upon to be
different.

Ever your
HENRY.




_To Robert Louis Stevenson._


34 De Vere Gardens, W.
Feb. 18th, 1891.

My dear Louis,

Your letter of December 29th is a most touching appeal; I am glad my own
last had been posted to you 2 or 3 weeks before it reached me. Whether
mine has--or will have been--guided to your coral strand is a matter as
to which your disclosures touching the state of the Samoan post inspire
me with the worst apprehensions. At any rate I did despatch
you--supposedly via San Francisco--a really pretty long screed about a
month ago. I ought to write to you all the while; but though I seem to
myself to live with my pen in my hand I achieve nothing capable of
connecting me so with glory. I am going to Paris to-morrow morning for a
month, but I have vowed that I will miss my train sooner than depart
without scrawling you and your wife a few words to-night. I shall
probably see little or nothing there that will interest you much (or
even interest myself hugely--) but having neither a yacht, an island, an
heroic nature, a gallant wife, mother and son, nor a sea-stomach, I have
to seek adventure in the humblest forms. In writing the other day I told
you more or less what I was doing--_am_ doing--in these elderly days;
and the same general description will serve. I am doing what I can to
launch myself in the dramatic direction--and the strange part of the
matter is that I am doing it more or less seriously, as if we _had_ the
Scène Anglaise which we haven't. And I secretly dream of supplying the
vile want? Pas même--and my zeal in the affair is only matched by my
indifference. What is serious in it is that having begun to work in this
sense some months ago, to give my little ones bread--I find the _form_
opens out before me as if there were a kingdom to conquer--a kingdom
forsooth of ignorant brutes of managers and dense cabotins of actors.
All the same, I feel as if I had at last _found_ my form--my real
one--that for which pale fiction is an ineffectual substitute. God grant
this unholy truth may not abide with me more than two or three
years--time to dig out eight or ten rounded masterpieces and make withal
enough money to enable me to retire in peace and plenty for the
unmolested business of a _little_ supreme writing, as distinguished from
gouging--which is the Form above-mentioned. Your loneliness and your
foodlessness, my dear Louis, bring tears to my eyes. If there were only
a parcels' post to Samoa I would set Fortnum and Mason to work at you at
this end of the line. But if they intercept the hieroglyphics at
Sydney, what would they do to the sausage? Surely there is some cure for
your emptiness; if nothing else, why not coming away? Don't eat up Mrs.
Louis, whatever you do. You are precious to literature--but she is
precious to the affections, which are larger, yet in a still worse
way.... I shall certainly do my utmost to get to Egypt to see you, if,
as is hinted to me by dear Colvin, you turn up there after the fitful
fever of Samoa. Your being there would give me wings--especially if
plays should give me gold. This is an exquisitely blissful dream. Don't
fail to do your part of it. I almost joy in your lack of the _Tragic
Muse_; as proving to me, I mean, that you are curious enough to have
missed it. Nevertheless I have just posted to you, registered, the first
copy I have received of the 1 vol. edition; but this moment out. I
wanted to send you the three volumes by Lloyd, but he seemed clear you
would have received it, and I didn't insist, as I knew he was charged
with innumerable parcels and bales. I will presently send another
_Muse_, and one, at least, must reach you.... Colvin is really better, I
think--if any one can be better who is so absolutely good. I hope to God
my last long letter will have reached you. I promise to write soon
again. I enfold you all in my sympathy and am ever your faithfullest

HENRY JAMES.




_To Charles Eliot Norton._


34 De Vere Gardens, W.
Aug. 28th, 1891.

My dear Charles,

It is only the conspiracy of hindrances so perpetually characteristic of
life in this place, even when it is theoretically not alive, as in the
mid-August, that has stayed my hand, for days past, when it has most
longed to write to you. Dear Lowell's death--the words are almost as
difficult as they are odious to write--has made me think almost as much
of you as of him. I imagine that you are the person in the world to whom
it makes the most complete and constant difference that he is no longer
here; just as you must have been the one most closely associated with
the too vain watching of his last struggle with the monster. It is a dim
satisfaction to me, therefore, to say to you how fond I was of him and
how I shall miss him and miss him and miss him. During these last
strange English years of his life (it would take me long to tell you why
I call them strange,) I had seen a great deal of him, and all with the
effect of confirming my affection for him. London is bestrewn, to my
sense, with reminders of his happy career here, and his company and his
talk. He was kind and delightful and gratifying to me, and all sorts of
occasions in which he will ever be vivid swarm before me as I think of
him.... Strange was his double existence--the American and the English
sides of his medal, which had yet so much in common. That is, I don't
know how English he was at home, but he was conspicuously American here.
However, I am not trying to characterize him, to you least of all who
had known him well so much longer and seen all, or most, of the chapters
of his history; but only letting you see how much I wish we might talk
of him together. Some day we will, though it's a date that seems
unfixable now. I am taking for granted ... that you inherit the greatest
of literary responsibilities to his memory. I think of this as a very
high interest, but also a very arduous labour. It's a blessing, however,
to feel that such an office is in such hands as yours. The posthumous
vulgarities of our day add another grimness to death. Here again is
another matter as to which I really miss not having the opportunity to
talk with you. This is a brief communication, my dear Charles, for I am
literally catching a train. I go down to the Isle of Wight half an hour
hence....




_To Edmund Gosse._

     This refers to the recent production of _The American_ in London.


34 De Vere Gardens, W.
October 2nd [1891].

My dear Gosse,

Your good and charming letter should have been answered on the spot--but
my days are abnormal and perspective and relation are blurred. I shall
come to see you the moment you return, and then I shall be able to tell
you more in five minutes than in fifteen of such hurried scrawls as
this. Meanwhile many thanks for your sympathy and curiosity and
suspense--_all_ thanks, indeed--and, in return, all eagerness for your
rentrée here. My own suspense has been and still is great--though the
voices of the air, rightly heard, seem to whisper _prosperity_. The
papers have been on the whole quite awful--but the audiences are
altogether different. The only thing is that these first three or four
weeks _must_ be up-hill: London is still empty, the whole enterprise is
wholly new--the elements must assemble. The strain, the anxiety, the
peculiar form and colour of such an ordeal (not to be divined the least
in advance) have sickened me _to death_--but I am getting better. I
forecast nothing, however--I only wait. Come back and wait with me--it
will be easier. Your picture of your existence and circumstance is like
the flicker of the open door of heaven to those recumbent in the
purgatory of yours not _yet_ damned--ah no!--

HENRY JAMES.




_To Mrs. Mahlon Sands._


Hôtel de l'Europe,
Dresden.

Dec. 12th [1891].

Dear Mrs. Sands,

Just a word--in answer to your note of sympathy--to say that I am
working through my dreary errand and service here as smoothly as three
stricken women--a mother and two sisters--permit. They are however very
temperate and discreet--and one of the sisters a little person of
extraordinary capacity--who will float them all successfully home.
Wolcott Balestier, the young American friend beside whose grave I stood
with but three or four others here on Thursday, was a very remarkable
creature who had been living in London for some three years--he had an
intimate _business_-relation with literature and was on the way to have
a really artistic and creative one. He had made himself a peculiar
international place--which it would take long to describe, and was full
of capacities, possibilities and really big inventions and ideas. He had
rendered me admirable services, become in a manner a part of my life,
and I was exceedingly attached to him. And now, at 30, he dies--in a
week--in a far-away German hospital--his mother and sisters were in
Paris--of a damnable vicious typhoid, contracted in his London office,
the "picturesqueness" of which he loved, as it was in Dean's Yard,
Westminster, just under the Abbey towers, and in a corner like that of a
peaceful Cathedral close. Many things, many enterprises, interests,
visions, originalities perish with him. Oh, the "ironies of fate," the
ugly tricks, the hideous practical jokes of life! I start for London
some time next week and shall very soon come and see you. I hope all is
well with you.

Yours always,
HENRY JAMES.




_To Mrs. Humphry Ward._

     The following was written a few days after the death of Miss Alice
     James.


34 De Vere Gardens, W.
March 10th [1892].

Dear Mrs. Ward,

Many, many thanks for your friendly remembrance of me--the flowers are
full of spring and life and the universe, as it were, and, besides this,
are very close and charming company to me as I sit scribbling--writing
many notes among other things--in still, indoor days that are grateful
to me. You were one of the very few persons in England who had seen my
sister even a little--and I am very glad of that. She was a rare and
remarkable being, and her death makes a great difference in my
existence. But for her it is only blessed. I hope you are happy in the
good reasons you have for being so--if one _is_ happy strictly
(certainly one isn't the reverse) for "reasons."

Believe me yours always,
HENRY JAMES.




_To Robert Louis Stevenson._

     Stevenson, it will be recalled, dedicated _Across the Plains_ to M.
     Paul Bourget, as an expression of his delight in that author's
     _Sensations d'Italie_, sent him by H. J. Mr. Kipling did not, as it
     turned out, pay his projected visit to Samoa, referred to in this
     letter.


34 De Vere Gardens, W.
March 19th, 1892.

My dear Louis,

I send you to-day by book-post, registered, a little volume of tales
which I lately put forth--most of which however you may have seen in
magazines. Please accept at any rate the modest offering. Accept, too,
my thanks for your sweet and dateless letter which I received a month
ago--the one in which you speak with such charming appreciation and
felicity of Paul Bourget. I echo your admiration--I think the Italian
book one of the most exquisite things of our time. I am in only very
occasional correspondence with him--and have not written since I heard
from you; but I shall have an early chance, now probably, to repeat your
words to him, and they will touch him in a tender place. He is living
much, now, in Italy, and I may go there for May or June--though indeed I
fear it is little probable. Colvin tells me of the volume of some of
your _inédites_ beauties that is on the point of appearing, and the news
is a bright spot in a vulgar world. The vulgarity of literature in these
islands at the present time is not to be said, and I shall clutch at you
as one turns one's ear to music in the clatter of the market-place. Yet,
paradoxical as it may appear, oh Louis, I have still had the refinement
not to read the _Wrecker_ in the periodical page. This is an enlightened
and judicious heroism, and I do as I would be done by. Trust me,
however, to taste you in long draughts as soon as I can hold the book.
Then will I write to you again. You tell me nothing of yourself--so I
have nothing to take up or take hold of, save indeed the cherished
superstition that you enjoy some measure of health and cheer. You are,
however, too far away for my imagination, and were it not for dear
Colvin's friendly magic, which puts in a pin here and there, I shouldn't
be able to catch and arrest at all the opaline iridescence of your
legend. Yet even when he speaks of intending wars and the clash of arms,
it all passes over me like an old-time song. You see how much I need you
close at hand to stand successfully on the tiptoe of emulation. You
fatigue, in short, my credulity, though not my affection. We lately
clubbed together, all, to despatch to you an eye-witness in the person
of the genius or the _genus_, in himself, Rudyard, for the concussion of
whose extraordinary personality with your own we are beginning soon to
strain the listening ear. We devoutly hope that this time he will really
be washed upon your shore. With him goes a new little wife--whose
brother--Wolcott Balestier, lately dead, in much youthful promise and
performance (I don't allude, in saying that, especially to the literary
part of it,) was a very valued young friend of mine.... The main thing
that has lately happened to myself is the death of my dear sister a
fortnight ago--after years of suffering, which, however, had not made
her any less rare and remarkable a person or diminished the effect of
the event (when it should occur) in making an extreme difference in my
life. Of my occupation what shall I tell you? I have of late years left
London less and less--but I am thinking sooner or later (in a near
present) of making a long foreign, though not distant, absence. I am
busy with the _short_--I have forsworn the long. I hammer at the horrid
little theatrical problem, with delays and intermissions, but, horrible
to relate, no failure of purpose. I shall soon publish another small
story-book which I will incontinently send you. I have done many brief
fictions within the last year.... The good little Thomas Hardy has
scored a great success with _Tess of the d'Urbervilles_, which is
chock-full of faults and falsity and yet has a singular beauty and
charm....

What we most talk of here, however, is the day when it may be believed
that you will come to meet us on some attainable southern shore. We will
_all_ go to the Mediterranean for you--let that not nail you to Samoa. I
send every greeting to your play-fellows--your fellow-phantoms. The
wife-phantom knows my sentiments. The ghost of a mother has my heartiest
regard. The long Lloyd-spectre laughs an eerie laugh, doubtless, at my
[word illegible] embrace. Yet I feel, my dear Louis, that I _do_ hold
you just long enough to press you to the heart of your very faithful old
friend,

HENRY JAMES.




_To Robert Louis Stevenson._


34 De Vere Gardens, W.
April 15th, 1892.

My dear Louis,

I send you by this post the magnificent Mémoires de Marbot, which should
have gone to you sooner by my hand if I had sooner read them and sooner,
thereby, grasped the idea of how much they would probably beguile for
you the shimmering tropical noon. The three volumes go to you in three
separate registered book-post parcels and all my prayers for an escape
from the queer perils of the way attend and hover about them. Some
people, I believe, consider this fascinating warrior a bien-conditionné
Munchausen--but perish the injurious thought. Me he not only charms but
convinces. I can't manage a letter, my dear Louis, to-day--I wrote you a
longish one, via San Francisco (like this,) just about a month ago. But
I mustn't fail to tell you that I have just read the last page of the
sweet collection of some of your happiest lucubrations put forth by the
care of dear Colvin. They make a most desirable, and moreover a very
honourable, volume. It was indispensable to bring them together and they
altogether justify it. The first one, and the Lantern-Bearers and two
last, are of course the best--these last are all made up of high and
admirable pages and do you the greatest credit. You have never felt,
thought, said, more finely and happily than in many a passage here, and
are in them altogether at your best. I don't see reviews or meet
newspapers now (beside which the work is scarcely in the market,) so I
don't know what fortune the book encounters--but it is enough for me--I
admit it can hardly be enough for you--that I love it. I pant for the
completion of The Wrecker--of which Colvin unwove the other night, to my
rapturous ear, the weird and wondrous tangle. I hope I don't give him
away if I tell you he even read me a very interesting letter from
you--though studded with critical stardust in which I a little lost my
way--telling of a project of a dashing roman de mœurs all about a
wicked woman. For this you may imagine how I yearn--though not to the
point of wanting it before the sequel of _Kidnapped_. For God's sake let
me have them both. I marvel at the liberality of your production and
rejoice in this high meridian of your genius. I leave London presently
for 3 or 4 months--I wish it were with everything required for leaping
on your strand. Sometimes I think I have got through the worst of
missing you and then I find I haven't. I pine for you as I pen these
words, for I am more and more companionless in my old age--more and more
shut up to the solitude inevitably the portion, in these islands, of him
who would really try, even in so small a way as mine, to _do_ it. I'm
often on the point of taking the train down to Skerryvore, to serenade
your ghosts, get them to throw a fellow a word. Consider this, at any
rate, a plaintive invocation. Again, again I greet your wife, that lady
of the closed lips, and I am yours, my dear Louis, and Lloyd's and your
mother's undiscourageably,

HENRY JAMES.




_To the Countess of Jersey._

     The "little story" is _The Lesson of the Master_, the opening
     scenes of which take place at "Summersoft." Lord Jersey was at this
     time Governor of New South Wales.


Hôtel de Sienne, Siena.
June 11th [1892].

Dear Lady Jersey,

Your kind letter finds me in a foreign land--the land in the world, I
suppose, least like New South Wales--and gives me very great pleasure.
It is charming to hear your voice so distinctly round so many corners of
the globe. Yes, "Summersoft" _did_ venture in a timorous and hesitating
manner to be an affectionate and yet respectful reminiscence of Osterley
the exquisite--of whose folded and deserted charms I can't bear to
think. But I beg you to believe--as indeed you will have perceived if
you were so good as to look at the little story--that the attempted
resemblance was only a matter of the dear old cubic sofa-cushions and
objects of the same delightful order, and not of the human furniture of
the house. I take the liberty of being, in your absence, so homesick for
Osterley that I can scarcely conceive of the pangs by which you and your
children and Lord Jersey--with your much greater right to indulge in
them--must sometimes be visited. I am delighted, however, to gather from
your letter that you have occupations and interests which drop a kindly
veil over that dreamland. It must indeed, I can imagine, be a
satisfaction to be really lending a hand in such a great young growing
world--doing something in it and with it and for it. May the sense of
all this make the years roll smoothly--till they roll you back into our
ken.... Please give my very friendliest remembrance to Lord Jersey--to
whom I wish--as to all of you--and indeed to myself, that you may serve
your term with an appearance of rapidity. And please believe, dear Lady
Jersey, that when it is over, no one will more heartily rejoice than
yours most faithfully,

HENRY JAMES.




_To Charles Eliot Norton._


Hôtel de Sienne, Siena.
July 4th, 1892.

My dear Charles,

Too long have I owed you a letter and too many times have your
generosities made me blush for my silence. I have received beautiful
books from you and they have given me almost more pleasure as signs of
your remembrance than as symbols of your wisdom and worth. The
Purgatorio reached me just before I came abroad--or a short time--and I
was delighted to know that you continue to find time and strength for
labours so various and so arduous. Great glory is yours--for making
something else come out of America than railway-smashes and young ladies
for lords. During a singularly charming month that I have been spending
in this most loveable old city I have often thought of you and wished I
had a small fraction of your power to put the soul of history into
Italian things. But I believe I shouldn't love Siena any better even if
I knew it better. I am very happy indeed to feel that--as I grow
older--many things come and go, but Italy remains. I have been here many
times--regularly every year or almost, for many years now, but the
spell, the charm, the magic is still in the air. I always try, between
May and August, to give London a wide berth, and I find these parts far
and away most pleasant when the summer has begun and the barbarians have
fled. As one stays and stays on here--I mean on _this_ spot--one feels
how untouched Siena really is by the modern hand. Yesterday was the
Palio of the ten contrade, and though I believe it is not so intense a
festival as the second one--of Aug. 15th (you have probably--or
certainly--seen them both)--it was a most curious and characteristic (of
an uninterrupted tradition) spectacle. The Marchese Chigi asked me and a
couple of friends--or rather asked _them_, and me with them--to see it
from the balcony of his extraordinarily fine old palace, where by the
way he has a large collection of Etruscan and Tarentine treasures--a
collection to break the heart of envy. My friends were Paul Bourget, the
French essayist and novelist (some of whose work you probably know,) and
his very remarkably charming, cultivated and interesting young wife.
They have been living in Italy these two years--ever since their
marriage, and I have been living much _with_ them here. Bourget is a
very interesting mind--and figure altogether--and the first--easily, to
my sense--of all the talkers I have ever encountered. But it would take
me much too far to _begin_ to give you a portrait of such a complicated
cosmopolitan Frenchman as he! But they departed, alas, this morning, for
the Piedmontese Alps, and I take my way, in a couple of hours, to
Venice, where I spend but a few days--with perhaps a few more at
Asolo--before joining my brother William and his wife for a month in
Switzerland. After that I expect to return to London for the last of the
summer and the early autumn--the season I prefer there above all others.
But before I do this I wish I could talk to you more about this sweet
old Siena. I have been talking for a month about it with Bourget--but
how much better it would have been for both of us if you could have
broken in and taken up the tale! But you did, sometimes, very
happily--for Mme. Paul knows you by heart (she is the Madonna of
cosmopolitan culture) and cites you with great effect. Have you read P.
B.'s _Sensations d'Italie_? If you haven't, do--it is one of the most
exquisite of books. Have you read any of his novels? If you haven't,
_don't_, though they have remarkable parts. Make an exception, however,
for _Terre Promise_, which is to appear a few months hence, and which I
have been reading in proof, here--if on trial, indeed, you find you can
stand so suffocating an analysis. It is perhaps "psychology" gone
mad--but it is an extraordinary production. A fortnight ago, on a
singularly lovely Sunday, we drove to San Gimignano and back. I had
never been there before, and the whole day was a delight. There are of
course four Americans living at San G.--one of whom proved afterwards to
have been an American "lady-newspaper-correspondent" furious at having
missed two such birds as Bourget and me--whom a single stone from that
rugged old quarry would have brought down. But she didn't know us until
we had departed and we fortunately didn't suspect her till a suppliant
card reached us two days later at Siena. We were in the hands of the
good old Canonico--the proposito, as they call him--and he put us gently
through. You remember well enough of course--though to such a far-away
world your Siena summer must seem to belong--the rich loveliness, at
this moment, of this exquisite old Tuscany. One can't say enough about
it, and the way the great sea of growing things--the corn and the vines
and the olives--breaks in green surges at the very foot of the old
golden-brown ramparts, is one of the most enchanting features of Siena.
There is still never a suburb to speak of save in the quarter of the
railway-station, and everywhere you look out of back-windows and
back-doors and off terraces and over parapets straight down into the
golden grain and the tangled poderi. Every evening we have gone to walk
in the Lizza and hang over the bastions of the Castello; where the near
views and the far, and the late afternoons and the sunsets and the
mountains have made us say again and again that we could never, never go
away. But we are coming back, and I greatly wish _you_ were. We went the
other day to the archivio, which I had never seen before, and where I
was amazed and fascinated. (It is a great luxury to be in Italy with a
French celebrity--he is so tremendously known and well treated, as the
"likes" of _us_ can never be, and one comes in for some of his
privileges.) You of course probably know, however, what the fullness,
detail, continuity and curiosity of the records of this place
are--filling with their visible, palpable medievalism the great upper
chamber of Pal. Piccolomini.

Basta--I have my trunk to pack and my reckoning to pay. I am very glad
to have shaken hands with you before I go. I saw dear Burne-Jones
tolerably often this spring--often unwell, but almost always stippling
away. He is the most loveable of men and the most disinterested of
artists, but sometimes I wish that he set himself a different order of
tasks. _Painting_--as I feel it most--it is true I have ceased to feel
it very much--is, with him, more and more "out of it." There remains,
however, a beautiful poetry.... I want to ask you 20 questions about
[Lowell's] papers--but I feel it isn't fair--and I must wait and see. I
hope this work--and your masses of other work--don't take all your
holiday.... I shall send this to Ashfield, and if you are there will you
give, for me, a very cordial greeting to that mythical man George
Curtis? I embrace all your house and am, my dear Charles, very
affectionately yours,

HENRY JAMES.




_To W. D. Howells._


34 De Vere Gardens, W.
Jan. 29th [1893].

My dear Howells,

Two beneficent notes have I had from you since last I wrote you a word:
one in regard to looking, effectively, after some _Cosmopolitan_
business in the autumn; the other a heavenly remark or two (still
further sublimated by Mildred's lovely photograph) in lately forwarding
me--with a courtesy worthy of a better cause--a particularly shameless
autograph-seeker's letter. For such and all of these good gifts I am
more thankful than the hurrying, days have left me much of a chance to
tell you. Most especially am I grateful for the portrait of the
beautiful, beautiful maiden. Please thank her from me, if not for
sending it, at least for so felicitously sitting for it. It makes me
jump the torrent of the years and reconstruct from her fine features the
mythological past--a still tenderer youth than her present youth. (I
ought to be able to mean my _own_; but I can't manage it--her profile
won't help me to _that_.) I envy you and your wife her company and I
rejoice for you in her presence. I rejoice for myself, my dear Howells,
about your so delicate words to me in regard to a bit of recent work.
They go to my heart--they go perhaps still straighter to my head! I am
so utterly lonely here--on the "literary plane"--that it is the
strangest as well as the sweetest sensation to be conscious in the
boundless void--the dim desert sands--of any human approach at all or
any kindly speech. Therefore please be very affectionately thanked.--All
this while I never see anything that you yourself have lately flowered
with--I mean the volumes that you freehandedly scatter. I console myself
with believing that one or two of your last serial fictions are not
volumes yet. Please hold them not back from soon becoming so. I see you
are drawing a longish bow in the _Cosmopolitan_--but I only read you
when I can sit down to a continuous feast and all the courses. You asked
me in your penultimate--I am talking now of your early-in-the-winter
letter--if I should object to being made a feature of your composed
reminiscences. To which I reply that I only wish that I could enrich
them better. I won't pretend that I like being written about--the sight
of my own name on a printed page makes me as ill (and the sensibility
increases strangely with time) as that of one of my creations makes me
well. I have a morbid passion for personal privacy and a standing
quarrel with the blundering publicities of the age. I wince even at
eulogy, and I wither (for exactly 2 minutes and 1/2) at any
qualification of adulation. But on the other hand I like, I love, to be
remembered by you and I surrender myself to your discretion. I hope your
winter, and Mrs. Howells' and the fairest of daughters's, is rich and
full and sane. How you must miss the Boy. I go abroad soon and hope to
see him in Paris. When do you do the same? Yours always, my dear
Howells,

HENRY JAMES.




_To Robert Louis Stevenson._


34 De Vere Gardens, W.
Feb. 17th, 1893.

My dear distant Louis,

The charmingest thing that had happened to me for a year was the advent
of your reassuring note of Dec. 5th (not 189_1_--my dear time-deluded
islander: it is enviable to see you so luxuriously "out." When you
indulge in the eccentricity of a date you make it eccentric indeed.) I
call your good letter reassuring simply on the general ground of its
making you credible for an hour. You are otherwise wholly of the stuff
that dreams are made of. I think this is why I don't keep writing to
you, don't talk to you, as it were, in my sleep. Please don't think I
forget you or am indifferent to anything that concerns you. The mere
thought of you is better company than almost any that is tangible to me
here, and London is more peopled to me by your living in Samoa than by
the residence of almost anybody else in Kensington or Chelsea. I fix my
curiosity on you all the while and try to understand your politics and
your perils and your public life. If in these efforts I make a poor
figure it is only because you are so wantonly away. Then I think I envy
you too much--your climate, your thrill of life, your magnificent
facility. You judge well that I have far too little of this last--though
you _can't_ judge how much more and more difficult I find it every day
to write. None the less I am presently putting forth, almost with exact
simultaneity, three little (distinct) books--2 volumes of penny fiction
and one of little essays, all material gathered, no doubt, from sources
in which you may already have encountered some of it. However this may
be, the matter shall again be (D.V.) deposited on your coral strand.
Most refreshing, even while not wholly convincing, was the cool
trade-wind (is the trade-wind cool?) of your criticism of some of _ces
messieurs_. I grant you Hardy with all my heart.... I am meek and
ashamed where the public clatter is deafening--so I bowed my head and
let "Tess of the D.'s" pass. But oh yes, dear Louis, she is vile. The
pretence of "sexuality" is only equalled by the absence of it, and the
abomination of the language by the author's reputation for style. There
are indeed some pretty smells and sights and sounds. But you have better
ones in Polynesia. On the other hand I can't go with you three yards in
your toleration either of ---- or of ----. Let me add that I can't read
them, so I don't know anything about them. All the same I make no bones
to pronounce them shameless _industriels_ and their works only glories
of Birmingham. You will have gathered that I delight in your year of
literary prowess. None the less I haven't read a word of you since the
brave and beautiful _Wrecker_. I won't _touch_ you till I can feel that
I embrace you in the embracing cover. So it is that I languish till the
things now announced appear. Colvin makes me impatient for _David
Balfour_--but doesn't yet stay my stomach with the _Beach of Falesà_....
Mrs. Sitwell _me fait part_ of every savoury scrap she gets from you. I
know what you all magnificently eat, and what dear Mrs. Louis splendidly
(but not somewhat transparently--no?) wears. Please assure that
intensely-remembered lady of my dumb fidelity. I am told your mother
nears our shores and I promise myself joy on seeing her and pumping her.
I don't know, however, alas, how long this ceremony may be delayed, as
I go to Italy, for all the blessed spring, next week. I have been in
London without an hour's absence since the middle of Aug. last. I hear
you utter some island objurgation, and go splashing, to banish the
stuffy image, into the sapphire sea. Is it all a fable that you will
come some month to the Mediterranean? I would go to the Pillars of
Hercules to greet you. Give my love to the lusty and literary Lloyd. I
am very glad to observe him spreading his wings. There is absolutely
nothing to send you. The Muses are dumb, and in France as well. Of
Bourget's big 7 franc _Cosmopolis_ I have, alas, purchased three
copies--and given them away; but even if I were to send you one you
would find it too round and round the subject--which heaven knows it
is--for your taste. I will try and despatch you the charming little
"Etui de Nacre" of Anatole France--a real master. Vale--age. Yours, my
dear Louis, in a kind of hopeful despair and a clinging alienation,

HENRY JAMES.




_To Mrs. Edmund Gosse._


Hôtel Westminster, Paris.
March 21st [1893].

Dear Mrs. Gosse,

Many thanks for your better news--and especially for the good news that
Gosse is coming to Paris. I shall be very glad to see him and shall
rejoice to take him gently by that injured--but I trust soon to be
reanimated--member. Please express this to him, with all my sympathy and
impatience. Won't he--or won't you (though indeed I shall cull the
precious date from Harland,) give me a hint, in advance of the
particular moment at which one may look for him? Please tell him
confidently to expect that Paris will create within him afresh all the
finest pulses of life. It is mild, sunny, splendid--blond and fair, all
in order for his approach. I allude of course to the specious
allurements of its exterior. The state is odorously rotten--but
everything else is charming. And then it's such a blessing, after long
grief and pain, to find the arms of a _climate_ around us once again!
Hasten, my dear Edmund, to be healed.

Thank heaven, my allusion to my own manual distress was mainly a florid
figure. My hand _is_ infirm--but I am not yet thinking of the knife.
Mille choses to the Terrace.

Yours and Gosse's always,
HENRY JAMES.




_To Edmund Gosse._

     The seductive "Queen of the Golconda," and of the Boulevard St.
     Michel, appears in Mr. Gosse's anecdote of Paul Verlaine (_French
     Profiles._) The passage of Loti's _Matelot_, to which H. J. refers,
     is the following: "Donc, ils en venaient à s'aimer d'une également
     pure tendresse, tous les deux. Elle, ignorante des choses d'amour
     et lisant chaque soir sa bible; elle, destinée à rester inutilement
     fraîche et jeune encore pendant quelques printemps pâles comme
     celui-ci, puis à vieillir et se faner dans l'enserrement monotone
     de ces mêmes rues et de ces mêmes murs. Lui, gâté déjà par les
     baisers et les étreintes, ayant le monde pour habitation
     changeante, appelé à partir, peut-être demain, pour ne revenir
     jamais et laisser son corps aux mers lointaines."


Hôtel Westminster, Paris.
Monday [May 1st, 1893].

My dear Gosse,

I have delayed too long to thank you for your genial last: which please
attribute to the misery of my Boulevard-baffled aspirations. Paris n'est
plus possible--from any point of view--and I leave it tomorrow or next
day, when my address will become: _Hotel National, Lucerne_. I join my
brother there for a short time. This place continues to _rengorger_ with
sunshine and sauces, not to mention other appeals to the senses and
pitfalls to the pocket. I am not alluding in particular to the Queen of
Golconda! I have read _Matelot_ more or less over again; for the extreme
penury of the _idea_ in Loti, and the almost puerile thinness of this
particular donnée, wean me not a jot from the irresistible charm the
rascal's very limitations have for me. I drink him down as he _is_--like
a philtre or a _baiser_, and the coloration of his _moindre mots_ has a
peculiar magic for me. Read _aloud_ to yourself the passage ending
section XXXV--the upper part of page 165, and perhaps you will find in
it something of the same strange _eloquence_ of suggestion and rhythm as
I do: which is what literature gives when it is most exquisite and which
constitutes its sovereign value and its resistance to devouring time.
And yet what _niaiseries_! Paris continues gorgeous and rainless, but
less torrid. I have become inured to fear as careless of penalties.
There are no new books but old papiers de famille et d'arrière-boutique
dished up. Poor Harland came and spent 2 or 3 hours with me the other
afternoon--at a café-front and on chairs in the Champs-Elysées. He
looked better than the time previous, but not well; and I am afraid
things are not too well _with_ him. One would like to help him--and I
try to--in talk; but he is not too helpable, for there is a chasm too
deep to bridge, I fear, in the pitfall of his literary longings
unaccompanied by the _faculty_. Apropos of such things I am very glad to
see _your_ faculty is reflowering. I shall return to England for the
volume. Are you writing about Symonds? Vale--especially in the manual
part. And valeat your _dame compagne_.

Yours, my dear Gosse, always,
HENRY JAMES.




_To Robert Louis Stevenson._

     Stevenson, writing to H. J. from Vailima, June 17, 1893, announced
     that he was sending a photograph of his wife. "It reminds me of a
     friend of my grandmother's who used to say when talking to younger
     women, 'Aweel, when I was young, I wasnae just exactly what ye wad
     call _bonny_, but I was pale, penetratin', and interestin'.'"
     (_Letters to his Family and Friends._)


34 De Vere Gardens, W.
August 5th, 1893.

My dear Louis,

I have a most charming and interesting letter, and a photographic
representation of your fine head which I cannot so unrestrictedly
commend, to thank you for. The portrait has its points as a memento, but
they are not fine points as a likeness. I remember you, I think of you,
I evoke you, much more plastically. But it was none the less liberal and
faithful of you to include me in the list of fond recipients. Your
letter contained all sorts of good things, but best of all the happy
news of your wife's better condition. I rejoice in that almost
obstreperously and beg you to tell her so with my love. The Sydney
photograph that you kindly announce (of her) hasn't come, but I
impatiently desire it. Meanwhile its place is gracefully occupied by
your delightful anecdote of your mother's retrospective Scotch
friend--the pale, penetratin' and interestin' one. Perhaps you will
permit me to say that it is exquisitely Scotch; at any rate it moves
altogether in the highest walks of anecdote.

I get, habitually, the sympathetic infection, from Colvin, of so much
general uneasiness and even alarm about you, that it is reassuring to
find you apparently incommoded by nothing worse than the privation of
liquor and tobacco. "Nothing worse?" I hear you echo, while you ask to
what more refined savagery of torture I can imagine you subjected. You
would rather perhaps--and small blame to you--perish by the sword than
by famine. But you won't perish, my dear Louis, and I am here to tell
you so. _I_ should have perished--long ago--if it were mortal. No
liquor--to speak of--passes my wasted lips, and yet they are capable of
the hypocrisy of the sigh of resignation. I am very, very sorry for
you--for I remember the genial tray which in the far-off, fabulous time
used to be placed, as the evening waxed, under the social lamp at
Skerryvore. The evenings wax at Vailima, but the tray, I gather, has
waned. May this heavy trial be lightened, and, as you missionaries say,
be even blessed to you. It wounds, I repeat, but it doesn't kill--more's
the pity. The tobacco's another question. I have smoked a cigarette--at
Skerryvore; and I shall probably smoke one again. But I don't look
forward to it. However, you will think me objectionably destitute of
temperament. What depresses me much more is the sad sense that you
receive scarcely anything I send you. This, however, doesn't deter me
from posting you to-day, registered, via San Francisco (it is post-day,)
a volume of thin trifles lately put forth by me and entitled _Essays in
London and Elsewhere_. It contains some pretty writing--not addressed to
the fishes. My last letter to you, to which yours of June 17th [was a
reply]--the only dated one, dear Louis, I ever got from you!--was
intended to accompany two other volumes of mine, which were despatched
to you, registered, via San F., at the same moment (_The Real Thing_ and
_The Private Life_.) Yet neither of these works, evidently, had reached
you when you ask me not to send you the former (though my letter
mentioned that it had started,) as you had ordered it. It is all a
mystery which the fishes only will have sounded. I also post to you
herewith Paul Bourget's last little tale (_Un Scruple_,) as to which
nothing will induce me to utter the faintest rudiments of an opinion. It
is full of talent (I don't call _that_ a rudiment,) but the French are
passing strange. I am very glad to be able to send you herewith enclosed
a _petit mot_ from the said Paul Bourget, in response to your sense of
outrage at his too-continuous silence.... His intentions, I can answer
for it, had been the best; but he leads so migratory a life that I don't
see how _any_ intention can ever well fructify. He has spent the winter
in the Holy Land and jumps thence in three weeks (from Beyrout) to his
queer American expedition. A year ago--more--he earnestly asked me (at
Siena) for your address. I as eagerly gave it to him--par écrit--but the
acknowledgment that he was then full of the desire to make to you
succumbed to complex frustrations. Now that, at last, here it is, I wish
you to be able to _read_ it! But you won't. My hand is the hand of
Apollo to it.

I have been at the sea-side for six weeks, and am back in the empty town
mainly because it is empty. _My_ sea-side is the sordid sands of
Ramsgate--I see your coral-reefs blush pink at the vulgarity of the
name. The place has for me an unutterable advantage (in the press of
working-weeks) which the beach of Falesà would, fortunately, _not_
have--that of being full of every one I don't know. The beach of Falesà
would enthrall but sterilize me--I mean the social muse would disjoint
the classic nose of the other. You will certainly think me barren enough
as I am. I am really less desiccated than I seem, however, for I am
working with patient subterraneity at a trade which it is dishonour
enough to practise, without talking about it: a trade supremely
dangerous and heroically difficult--_that_ credit at least belongs to
it. The case is simplified for me by the direst necessity: the _book_,
as my limitations compel me to produce it, doesn't bring me in a penny.
Tell it not in Samoa--or at least not in Tahiti; but I _don't_ sell ten
copies!--and neither editors nor publishers will have anything whatever
to say to me. But I never mention it--nearer home. "Politics," dear
politician--I rejoice that you are getting over them. When you say that
you always "believed" them beastly I am tempted to become superior and
say that I always knew them so. At least I don't see how one can have
glanced, however cursorily, at the contemporary newspapers (I mean the
journal of one's whole time,) and had any doubt of it. The morals, the
manners, the materials of all those gentlemen are writ there more large
than any record is elsewhere writ, and the impudence of their airs and
pretensions in the presence of it revolts even the meekness of a spirit
as resigned to everything as mine. The sordid fight in the House of
Commons the other night seemed to me only a momentary intermission of
hypocrisy. The hypocrisy comes back with the pretended confusion over
it. The Lives of the Stevensons (with every respect to them) isn't what
I want you most to write, but I would rather you should publish ten
volumes of them than another letter to the _Times_. Meanwhile I am
languishing for _Catriona_--and the weeks follow and I must live without
you. It isn't life. But I am still amicably yours and your wife's and
the insidious Lloyd's,

HENRY JAMES.




_To Robert Louis Stevenson._


34 De Vere Gardens, W.
October 21st [1893.]

My dear Louis,

The postal guide tells me, disobligingly, that there is no mail to you
via San Francisco this month and that I must confide my few lines to
the precarious and perfidious Hamburg. I do so, then, for the plain
reason that I can no longer repress the enthusiasm that has surged
within me ever since I read _Catriona_. I missed, just after doing so,
last month's post, and I was infinitely vexed that it should not have
conveyed to you the freshness of my rapture. For the said _Catriona_ so
reeks and hums with genius that there is no refuge for the desperate
reader but in straightforward prostration. I'm not sure that it's
magnanimous of you to succeed so inconsiderately--there is a modesty in
easy triumph which your flushed muse perhaps a little neglects.--But
forgive that lumbering image--I won't attempt to carry it out. Let me
only say that I don't despatch these ineffectual words on their too
watery way to do anything but thank you for an exquisite pleasure. I
hold that when a book has the high beauty of that one there's a poor
indelicacy in what simple folk call criticism. The work lives by so
absolute a law that it's grotesque to prattle about what _might_ have
been! I shall express to you the one point in which my sense was
conscious of an unsatisfied desire, but only after saying first how rare
an achievement I think the whole personality and tone of David and with
how supremely happy a hand you have coloured the palpable women. They
are quite too lovely and everyone is running after them. In David not an
error, not a false note ever; he is all of an exasperating truth and
rightness. The one thing I miss in the book is the note of
_visibility_--it subjects my visual sense, my _seeing_ imagination, to
an almost painful underfeeding. The _hearing_ imagination, as it were,
is nourished like an alderman, and the loud audibility seems a slight
the more on the baffled lust of the eyes--so that I seem to myself (I am
speaking of course only from the point of view of the way, as I read,
_my_ impression longs to complete itself) in the presence of voices in
the darkness--voices the more distinct and vivid, the more brave and
sonorous, as voices always are--but also the more tormenting and
confounding--by reason of these bandaged eyes. I utter a pleading moan
when you, e.g., transport your characters, toward the end, in a line or
two from Leyden to Dunkirk without the glint of a hint of all the
ambient picture of the 18th century road. However, stick to your own
system of evocation so long as what you positively achieve is so big.
Life and letters and art all take joy in you.

I am rejoiced to hear that your wife is less disturbed in health and
that your anxieties are somewhat appeased. I don't know how sufficiently
to renew, to both of you, the assurance of all my friendliest sympathy.
You live in conditions so unimaginable and to the tune of experience so
great and so strange that you must forgive me if I am altogether out of
step with your events. I know you're surrounded with the din of battle,
and yet the beauty you produce has the Goethean calm, even like the
beauty distilled at Weimar when the smoke was over Jena. Let me touch
you at least on your bookish side and the others may bristle with
heroics. I pray you be made accessible some day in a talkative armchair
by the fire. If it hadn't been for _Catriona_ we couldn't, this year,
have held up our head. It had been long, before that, since any decent
sentence was turned in English. We grow systematically vulgarer and
baser. The only blur of light is that your books are tasted. I shall try
to see Colvin before I post this--otherwise I haven't seen him for three
months. I've had a summer of the British seaside, the bathing machine
and the German band. I met Zola at luncheon the day before he left
London and found him very sane and common and inexperienced. Nothing,
literally nothing, has ever happened to him but to write the
Rougon-Macquart. It makes that series, I admit, still more curious.
Your tour de force is of the opposite kind. Renew the miracle, my dear
Louis, and believe me yours already gaping,

HENRY JAMES.

P.S. I have had to keep my poor note several days--finding that after
all there _is_, thank heaven, a near post by San Francisco. Meanwhile I
have seen Colvin and made discreetly, though so eagerly, free of some of
your projects--and gyrations! Trapezist in the Pacific void!

..."Catriona" is more and more BEAUTIFUL. There's the rub!

H.J.




_To William James._

     The incident referred to in the following letter was the unexpected
     miscarriage of one of H. J.'s theatrical schemes. Meanwhile _Guy
     Domville_ had been accepted for future production at the St.
     James's Theatre.


34 De Vere Gardens, W.
Dec. 29th, 1893.

...I rejoice greatly in Alice's announcement (which you, William, coyly
don't mention) of the presidency of the [Society for Psychical
Research]. I hope it's all honour and kudos and pleasantness, without a
tax of botherations. I wish I could give you some correspondingly good
tidings of my own ascensory movement; but I had a fall--or rather took a
jump--the other day (a month ago) of which the direction was not
vulgarly--I mean theatrically and financially--upward. You are so
sympathetic about the whole sordid development that I make a point of
mentioning the incident.... It was none the less for a while a lively
disgust and disappointment--a waste of patient and ingenious labour and
a sacrifice of coin much counted on. But à la guerre comme à la guerre.
I mean to wage this war ferociously for one year more--1894--and then
(unless the victory and the spoils have by that become more
proportionate than hitherto to the humiliations and vulgarities and
disgusts, all the dishonour and chronic insult incurred) to "chuck" the
whole intolerable experiment and return to more elevated and more
independent courses. The whole odiousness of the thing lies in the
connection between the drama and the theatre. The one is admirable in
its interest and difficulty, the other loathsome in its conditions. If
the drama could only be theoretically or hypothetically acted, the
fascination resident in its all but unconquerable (_circumspice!_) form
would be unimpaired, and one would be able to have the exquisite
exercise without the horrid sacrifice. However, Alexander's preparations
of my play are going on sedulously, as to which situation and
circumstances are all essentially different. He will produce me at no
distant date, infallibly.... But meanwhile I am working heroically,
though it every month becomes more difficult to give time to things of
which the pecuniary fruit is remote. Excuse these vulgar confidences. I
_have_ come to _hate_ the whole theatrical subject.... Don't write to
condole with me about the business. I don't in the least "require" it.
May the new year not have too many twists and turns for you, but lie
straight and smooth before you.

Evermore your
HENRY.




_To Julian R. Sturgis._


34 De Vere Gardens, W.
Sunday [1893].

My dear Julian,

I wish I had your gift of facile and fascinating rhyme: I would turn it
to account to thank you for your note and your sympathy. Yes, Ibsen is
ugly, common, hard, prosaic, bottomlessly bourgeois--and with his
distinction so far _in_, as it were, so behind doors and beyond
vestibules, that one is excusable for not pushing one's way to it. And
yet of his art he's a master--and I feel in him, to the pitch of almost
intolerable boredom, the presence and the insistence of life. On the
other hand his mastery, so bare and lean as it is, wouldn't count nearly
as much in any medium in which the genus was otherwise represented. In
_our_ sandy desert even this translated octopus (excuse my confusion of
habitats!!) sits alone, and isn't kept in his place by relativity.
"Thanks awfully" for having retained an impression from the few Tales.
My intentions are mostly good. I hope to knock at your door this p.m.

Yours always,
HENRY JAMES.


_To George du Maurier._

     An article by H. J. on George du Maurier had appeared in _Harper's
     Weekly_, April 14, 1894.


Casa Biondetti, San Vio 715,
Venice.

Thursday [May 1894].

Only see, my dear Kikaccio, to what my thick-and-thin espousal of your
genius exposes me at the hands of an unknown American female.
Guileless, stupid, muddled, distracted, well-meaning, but slightly
hypocritical American female!--Don't return, of course, the letter. I
haven't seen the little _cochonnerie_ I wrote about you, bothered,
preoccupied with other work, more and more incapable of writing _that_
sort of thing gracefully and properly--in the muddle and confusion of my
coming abroad; and I hope _you_ haven't, by the trop bons soins of
McIlvaine, seen it either. But I bless it in that through arousing the
American female my clumsy 'critique' has given me the occasion to
salutarvi tutti. Are you on the hill or in the vale? I give it up, only
pressing you all to my bosom wherever you are. Trilby goes on with a
life and charm and loveability that gild the whole day one reads her.
It's most delightfully and vividly talked! And then drawn!--no, it isn't
fair. Well, I'm in Venice and you're not--so you've not got quite
everything. It has been cold and wet; but Italy is always Italy--and the
only thing really to be depended on quand même. I hope you have not
returned to Hampstead, if you _have_ returned, without tying your legs
somewhere or other to Bayswater. I hope that everything has been well
with you all--you yourself most well. It makes me homesick to write to
you--but it is the only thing that does. I trust fame and flattery and
flowers flow in upon you with the revolving Harpers.... Write me a
word--tell me you don't hate me. I seem to remember rather disagreeably
what I wrote about you.

Yours, caro mio, always,
HENRY JAMES.




_To William James._

     H. J. had just received from his brother the diary which their
     sister had kept during her last years in England.


Grand Hotel, Rome.
May 28th, 1894.

My dear William:--my dear Alice:--

I wrote you a scrabbly note from Ravenna a few days since--but I must
follow it up, without delay, with something better. I came on here an
hour afterwards, and shall remain till June 1st or 2nd. I find Rome
deliriously cool and empty, and still very pleasing in spite of the
"ruining" which has been going on so long and of which one has heard so
much, i.e., the redemption and cockneyfication of the ruins. This
"changes" immensely--as everyone says; but I find myself, I am afraid,
so much _more_ changed--since I first knew and rhapsodized over it, that
I am bound in justice to hold Rome the less criminal of the two. I am
thinking a little about going down--if the coolness lasts--for three or
four days to Naples; but I haven't decided. I feel rather hard and
heartless to be prattling about these touristries to you, with the sad
picture I have had these last weeks of your--William's--state of
suffering. But it is only a way of saying that that state makes one feel
it to be the greater duty for me to be as well as I can. Absit omen!
Your so interesting letter of the 6th dictated to Alice speaks of the
possibility of your abscess continuing not to heal--but I trust the
event has long ere this reassured, comforted and liberated you.
Meanwhile may Alice have smoothed your pillow as even she has never
smoothed it before.... As regards the life, the power, the temper, the
humour and beauty and expressiveness of the Diary in itself--these
things were partly "discounted" to me in advance by so much of Alice's
talk during her last years--and my constant association with her--which
led me often to reflect about her extraordinary force of mind and
character, her whole way of taking life--and death--in very much the
manner in which the book does. I find in its pages, for instance, many
things I heard her say. None the less I have been immensely impressed
with the thing as a revelation of a moral and personal picture. It is
heroic in its individuality, its independence--its face-to-face with the
universe for and by herself--and the beauty and eloquence with which she
often expresses this, let alone the rich irony and humour, constitute (I
wholly agree with you) a new claim for the family renown. This last
element--her style, her power to write--are indeed to me a delight--for
I have had many letters from her. Also it brings back to me all sorts of
things I am glad to keep--I mean things that happened, hours, occasions,
conversations--brings them back with a strange, living richness. But it
also puts before me what I was tremendously conscious of in her
life-time--that the extraordinary intensity of her will and personality
really would have made the equal, the reciprocal, life of a "well"
person--in the usual world--almost impossible to her--so that her
disastrous, her tragic health was in a manner the only solution for her
of the practical problem of life--as it suppressed the element of
equality, reciprocity, etc. The violence of her reaction against her
British _ambiente_, against everything English, engenders some of her
most admirable and delightful passages--but I feel in reading them, as I
always felt in talking with her, that inevitably she simplified too
much, shut up in her sick room, exercised her wondrous vigour of
judgment on too small a scrap of what really surrounded her. It would
have been modified in many ways if she had _lived_ with them (the
English) more--seen more of the men, etc. But doubtless it is fortunate
for the fun and humour of the thing that it wasn't modified--as surely
the critical emotion (about them,) the essence of much of their nature,
was never more beautifully expressed. As for her allusions to H.--they
fill me with tears and cover me with blushes.... I find an immense
eloquence in her passionate "radicalism"--her most distinguishing
feature almost--which, in her, was absolutely direct and original (like
everything that was in her,) unreflected, uncaught from entourage or
example. It would really have made her, had she lived in the world, a
feminine "political force." But had she lived in the world and seen
things nearer she would have had disgusts and disillusions. However,
what comes out in the book--as it came out to me in fact--is that she
was really an Irishwoman; transplanted, transfigured--yet none the less
fundamentally national--in spite of her so much larger and finer than
Irish intelligence. She felt the Home Rule question absolutely as only
an Irishwoman (not anglicised) could. It was a tremendous emotion with
her--inexplicable in any other way--but perfectly explicable by
"atavism." What a pity she wasn't born there--and had her health for it.
She would have been (if, always, she had not fallen a victim to
disgust--a large "if") a national glory! But I am writing too much and
my late hindrances have left me with tremendous arrears of
correspondence. I thank you, dear Alice, _caramente_, for your sweet
letter received two or three weeks before William's. I crudely hope you
won't let your house--so as to have it to go to in the summer. Otherwise
what will become of you. I dig my nose into the fleshiest parts of the
young Francis. Tell Peggy I cling to her--and to Harry too, and Billy
not less.... I haven't sent you "The Yellow Book"--on purpose; and
indeed I have been weeks and weeks receiving a copy of it myself. I say
on purpose because although my little tale which ushers it in ("The
Death of the Lion") appears to have had, for a thing of mine, an unusual
success, I hate too much the horrid aspect and company of the whole
publication. And yet I am again to be intimately, conspicuously
associated with the 2d number. It is for gold and to oblige the
worshipful Harland (the editor). Wait and read the two tales in a
volume--with 2 or 3 others. Above all be _debout_ and forgive the long
reticence of your affectionate

HENRY.




_To Edmund Gosse._

     Mr. Gosse and his family, with Mr. A. C. Benson, were at this time
     spending a holiday in Switzerland, apparently not without
     mischance. Stevenson's offending letter is to be found among his
     published correspondence, dated from Vailima, July 7, 1894. H. J.
     misrepresents the phrase he quotes. "I decline any longer to give
     you examples of how not to write" are Stevenson's words.


Tregenna Castle Hotel,
St. Ives.

August 22nd [1894].

My dear Gosse,

I should have been very glad to hear from you yesterday if only for the
sweet opportunity it gives me of crying out that I told you so! It gives
me more than this--and I _didn't_ tell you so; but I wanted to
awfully--and I only smothered my wisdom under my waistcoat. Tell Arthur
Benson that I wanted to tell _him_ so too--that guileless morning at
Victoria: I knew so well, both then and at Delamere Terrace, with my
half century of experience, straight into what a purgatory you were
_all_ running. The high Swiss mountain inn, the crowd, the cold, the
heat, the rain, the Germans, the scramble, the impossible rooms and the
still more impossible everything else--the hope deferred, the money
misspent, the weather accurst: these things I saw written on your azure
brows even while I perfidiously prattled with your prattle. The only
thing was to let you do it--for one can no more come between a lady and
her Swiss hotel than between a gentleman and his wife. Meanwhile I sit
here looking out at _my_ nice, domestic, inexpensive English rain, in
_my_ nice bad stuffy insular inn, and thanking God that I am not as
Gosses and Bensons are. I am pretty bad, I recognise--but I am not so
bad as you. I am so bad that I am fleeing in a day or two--as I hope you
will have been doing if your ineluctable fate doesn't spare you. I
stopped on my way down here to spend three days with W. E. Norris, which
were rendered charming by the urbanity of my host and the peerless
beauty of Torquay, with which I fell quite in love. Here I go out for
long walks on wet moors with the silent Stephen, the almost speechless
Leslie. In the morning I improve the alas not shining hours, in a little
black sitting-room which looks out into the strange area--like unto that
of the London milkman--with which this ci-devant castle is encompassed
and which sends up strange scullery odours into my nose. I am very sorry
to hear of any friends of yours suffering by the Saturday Review, but I
know nothing whatever of the cataclysm. It's a journal which (in spite
of the lustre you add to it) I haven't so much as seen for 15 years, and
no echoes of its fortunes ever reach me.

23rd. I broke off yesterday to take a long walk over bogs and brambles,
and this morning my windows are lashed by a wet hurricane. It makes me
wish I could settle down to a luxurious irresponsible day with the
_Lourdes_ of your appreciation, which lies there on my table still
uncut. But my "holiday" is no holiday and I must drive the mechanic pen.
Moreover I have vowed not to open _Lourdes_ till I shall have closed
with a final furious bang the unspeakable _Lord Ormont_, which I have
been reading at the maximum rate of ten pages--ten insufferable and
unprofitable pages, a day. It fills me with a critical rage, an artistic
fury, utterly blighting in me the indispensable principle of _respect_.
I have finished, at this rate, but the first volume--whereof I am moved
to declare that I doubt if any equal quantity of extravagant verbiage,
of airs and graces, of phrases and attitudes, of obscurities and
alembications, ever _started_ less their subject, ever contributed less
of a statement--told the reader less of what the reader needs to know.
All elaborate predicates of exposition without the ghost of a nominative
to hook themselves to; and not a difficulty met, not a figure presented,
not a scene constituted--not a dim shadow condensing once either into
audible or into visible reality--making you hear for an instant the tap
of its feet on the earth. Of course there are pretty things, but for
what they are they come so much too dear, and so many of the
profundities and tortuosities prove when threshed out to be only
pretentious statements of the very simplest propositions. Enough, and
forgive me. Above all don't send this to the P.M.G. There is another
side, of course, which one will utter another day. I have a dictated
letter from R. L. S., sent me through Colvin, who is at Schwalbach with
the horsey Duchess of Montrose, a disappointing letter in which the too
apt pupil of Meredith tells me nothing that I want to know--nothing save
that his spirits are low (which I would fain ignore,) and that he has
been on an excursion on an English man-of-war. The devilish letter is
wholly about the man-of-war, not a word else; and at the end he says "I
decline to tell you any more about it!" as if I had prescribed the
usurping subject. You shall see the rather melancholy pages when you
return--I must keep them to answer them. Bourget and his wife are in
England again--at Oxford: with Prévost at Buxton, H. Le Roux at
Wimbledon etc., it is the Norman conquest beginning afresh. What will be
the end, or the effect, of it? P. B. has sent me some of the sheets (100
pp.) of his _Outremer_, which are singularly agreeable and lively. It
will be much the prettiest (and I should judge kindest)
socio-psychological book written about the U.S. That is saying little.
It is very living and interesting. Prévost's fetid étude (on the little
girls) represents a perfect bound, from his earlier things, in the way
of hard, firm, knowing ability. So clever--and so common; no ability to
imagine his "queenly" girl, made to dominate the world, do anything
finally by way of illustrating her superiority but become a professional
cocotte, like a _fille de portier_.

Pity's akin to love--so I send that to Mrs Nellie and Tessa and to A.
Benson.

Yours ever,
HENRY JAMES.




_To Edmund Gosse._

     This refers to an essay by Mr. Gosse on the Norwegian novelist
     Björnson, prefixed to an English translation of his _Synnövé
     Solbakken_.


34 De Vere Gardens, W.
Nov. 9th, 1894.

My dear Gosse,

Many thanks for the study of the roaring Norseman, which I read
attentively last night--without having time, claimed by more _intimes_
perusals, for reading his lusty fable. Björnson has always been, I
frankly confess, an untended prejudice--a hostile one--of mine, and the
effect of your lively and interesting monograph has been, I fear, to
validate the hardly more than instinctive mistrust. I don't think you
justify him, _rank_ him enough--hardly quite enough for the attention
you give him. At any rate he sounds in your picture--to say nothing of
looking, in his own!--like the sort of literary fountain from which I am
ever least eager to drink: the big, splashing, blundering genius of the
hit-or-miss, the _a peu près_, family--without perfection, or the effort
toward it, without the exquisite, the love of selection: a big
super-abundant and promiscuous democrat. On the other hand the
impossibly-named _Novelle_ would perhaps win me over. But the human
subject-matter in these fellows is so rebarbatif--"Mrs. Bang-Tande!"
What a Romeo and Juliet! Have you seen Maurice Barrès's last volume--"Du
Sang, de la Volupté et de la Mort"? That is exquisite in its fearfully
intelligent impertinence and its diabolical Renanisation. We will talk
of these things--all thanks meanwhile for the book.

Yours ever,
HENRY JAMES.




_To Edmund Gosse._

     Mr. Gosse's study of Walter Pater is included in his _Critical
     Kit-kats_.


34 De Vere Gardens, W.
[Dec. 13th, 1894.]

My dear Gosse,

I return with much appreciation the vivid pages on Pater. They fill up
substantially the void of one's ignorance of his personal history, and
they are of a manner graceful and luminous; though I should perhaps
have relished a little more insistence on--a little more of an inside
view of--the nature of his mind itself. Much as they tell, however, how
curiously negative and faintly-grey he, after all telling, remains! I
think he has had--will have had--the most exquisite literary fortune:
i.e. to have taken it out all, wholly, exclusively, with the pen (the
style, the genius,) and absolutely not at all with the person. He is the
mask without the face, and there isn't in his total superficies a tiny
point of vantage for the newspaper to flap his wings on. You have been
lively about him--but about whom _wouldn't_ you be lively? I think you'd
be lively about _me_!--Well, faint, pale, embarrassed, exquisite Pater!
He reminds me, in the disturbed midnight of our actual literature, of
one of those lucent matchboxes which you place, on going to bed, near
the candle, to show you, in the darkness, where you can strike a light:
he shines in the uneasy gloom--vaguely, and has a phosphorescence, not a
flame. But I quite agree with you that he is not of the little day--but
of the longer time.

Will you kindly ask Tessa if I may _still_ come, on Saturday? My visit
to the country has been put off by a death--and if there is a little
corner for me I'll appear. If there isn't--so late--no matter. I daresay
I ought to write to Miss Wetton. Or will Tessa amiably inquire?

Yours always,
HENRY JAMES.




_To Edmund Gosse._

     The news of Stevenson's death in Samoa reached London at this
     moment, when H. J. was deeply occupied with the rehearsals of _Guy
     Domville_ at the St. James's Theatre. "Jan. 5th" was to be the
     first night of the play.


34 De Vere Gardens, W.
Dec. 17th, 1894.

My dear Gosse,

I meant to write you to-night on another matter--but of what can one
think, or utter or dream, save of this ghastly extinction of the beloved
R.L.S.? It is too miserable for cold words--it's an absolute desolation.
It makes me cold and sick--and with the absolute, almost alarmed sense,
of the visible material quenching of an indispensable light. That he's
silent forever will be a fact hard, for a long time, to live with.
To-day, at any rate, it's a cruel, wringing emotion. One feels how one
cared for him--what a place he took; and as if suddenly _into_ that
place there had descended a great avalanche of ice. I'm not sure that
it's not for _him_ a great and happy fate; but for us the loss of charm,
of suspense, of "fun" is unutterable. And how confusedly and pityingly
one's thought turns to those far-away stricken women, with their whole
principle of existence suddenly quenched and yet all the monstrosity of
the rest of their situation left on their hands! I saw poor Colvin
to-day--he is overwhelmed, he is touching: But I can't write of this--we
must talk of it. Yet these words have been a relief.

And I can't write, either, of the matter I had intended to--viz. that
you are to rest secure about the question of Jan. 5th--I will do
everything for you. _That_ business becomes for the hour tawdry and
heartless to me.

Yours always,
HENRY JAMES.




_To Sidney Colvin._

     H. J. unexpectedly found himself named by Stevenson as one of his
     executors; but this charge he felt it impossible to undertake, on
     account of his complete inexperience in matters of business. The
     last paragraph of this letter refers to a suggestion that the
     cabled news of Stevenson's death might prove to be mistaken.


34 De Vere Gardens, W.
Dec. 20th, '94.

My dear Colvin,

I didn't come, as I threatened, to see you this a.m.; because up to the
time I was forced (early) to absent myself from home for several hours
no sign had come from Edinburgh. On coming home at 4 o'clock, however, I
found both a telegram and a letter from Mr. Mitchell. The telegram asked
for a telegraphic _Yea_ or _Nay_ that might instantly be cabled to
Baxter at Port Said. I immediately wired a profoundly regretful, but
unconditional and insurmountable refusal. The absolute necessity of
doing this has gathered still more overwhelming force since I saw you
yesterday--if indeed there could have been any "still more" when the
maximum had been so promptly reached. To ease still more (at all events)
my conscience--though God knows it was, and is, easy!--I conferred last
p.m. with a sage friend about the matter, and if I had been in the
smallest degree unsettled some words he dropped about the pecuniary
liability of executors, under certain new regulations (in regard to the
Revenue &c,) would sufficiently have fixed me. But in truth the
question was not even one to talk of at all--even to the extent of
asking for confirmations. I wish the thing could have been otherwise.
But that is idle. So I have answered Mr. Mitchell's letter, by this
evening's post, in a manner that leaves no doubt either of my decision
or my sorrow. There _may_ be something legal for me to do to be
exonerated: I have inquired.

And meanwhile comes the torture of such phenomena as Dr. Balfour's
letter in to-day's _P.M.G._--a torture doubtless only meant (by a
perverse Providence) to deepen the final pain. At any rate it is
unsettling to the point of nervous anguish--or à peu près. But to whom
do I say this? I don't like to think of _your_ horrible worry--your all
but damnable suspense. _Don't answer this_--or write me unless you
particularly want to: I ache, in sympathy, under the letters, telegrams,
complications of every sort you have to meet: that you may find strength
to bear which is the hearty wish of yours, my dear Colvin, more than
ever,

HENRY JAMES.




_To Miss Henrietta Reubell._


34 De Vere Gardens, W.
December 31st, 1894.

Dear Miss Etta,

This is to wish you a brand-New Year, and to wish it very
affectionately--and to wish it of not more than usual length but of more
than usual fulness. I have had an unacknowledged letter from you longer
than is decorous. But I have shown you ere this that epistolary decorum
is a virtue I have ceased to pretend to. And during the last month I
have not pretended to any other virtue either--save an endless patience
and an heroic resignation, as I have been, and still am, alas, in the
sorry position of having in rehearsal a little play--3 acts--which is to
be produced on Saturday next, at the St. James's Theatre, as to which I
beg you heartily to indulge for me, about 8.30 o'clock on that evening,
in very fervent prayer. It is a little "romantic" play of which the
action is laid (in England) in the middle of the last century, and it
will be exquisitely mounted, dressed &c., and very creditably acted, as
things go here. But rehearsal is an _écœurment_ is the right
spelling] and one's need of heroic virtues infinite. I have been in the
breach daily for 4 weeks, and am utterly exhausted. To-night (the
theatre being closed for the week on purpose) is the first dress
rehearsal--which is here of course not a public, as in Paris, but an
intensely private function--all for me, _me prélassant dans mon
fauteuil_, alone, like the King of Bavaria at the opera. There are to be
three nights more of this, to give them ease in the wearing of their
clothes of a past time, and that, after the grind of the earlier work,
is rather amusing--as amusing as anything can be, for a man of taste and
sensibility, in the odious process of practical dramatic production. I
may have been meant for the Drama--God knows!--but I certainly wasn't
meant for the Theatre. C'est pour vous dire that I am much pressed and
am only sending you mes vœux très-sincères in a shabbily brief little
letter. There are a number of interesting things in your last to which I
want to respond. I send you also by post 3 or 4 miserable little (old)
views of Tunbridge Wells, which I have picked up in looking, at rare
leisure moments, for one good one for you. I haven't, alas, found that;
but I think I am on the track of it, and you shall have it as soon as it
turns up. Accept these meanwhile as a little stop-gap and a symbol of my
New Year's greeting.... I hope you are in good case and good hope. We
are having here an excellent winter, almost fogless and generally
creditable. Write me a little word of hope and help for the 5th; I shall
regard it as a happy influence for yours forever,

HENRY JAMES.




_To William James._


34 De Vere Gardens, W.
Jan. 9th, 1895.

My dear William,

I never cabled to you on Sunday 6th (about the first night of my play,)
because, as I daresay you will have gathered from some despatches or
newspapers (if there have been any, and you have seen them,) the case
was too complicated. Even now it's a sore trial to me to have to write
about it--weary, bruised, sickened, disgusted as one is left by the
intense, the cruel ordeal of a first night that--after the immense
labour of preparation and the unspeakable tension of suspense--has, in a
few brutal moments, not gone well. In three words the delicate,
picturesque, extremely human and extremely artistic little play was
taken profanely by a brutal and ill-disposed gallery which had shown
signs of malice prepense from the first and which, held in hand till the
end, kicked up an infernal row at the fall of the curtain. There
followed an abominable quarter of an hour during which all the forces of
civilization in the house waged a battle of the most gallant, prolonged
and sustained applause with the hoots and jeers and catcalls of the
roughs, whose _roars_ (like those of a cage of beasts at some infernal
"zoo") were only exacerbated (as it were) by the conflict. It was a
cheering scene, as you may imagine, for a nervous, sensitive, exhausted
author to face--and you must spare my going over again the horrid hour,
or those of disappointment and depression that have followed it; from
which last, however, I am rapidly and resolutely, thank God, emerging.
The "papers" have, into the bargain, been mainly ill-natured and densely
stupid and vulgar; but the only two dramatic critics who count, W.
Archer and Clement Scott, have done me more justice. Meanwhile all
_private_ opinion is apparently one of extreme admiration--I have been
flooded with letters of the warmest protest and assurance.... Everyone
who was there has either written to me or come to see me--I mean every
one I know and many people I don't. Obviously the little play, which I
strove to make as broad, as simple, as clear, as British, in a word, as
possible, is over the heads of the _usual_ vulgar theatre-going London
public--and the chance of its going for a while (which it is too early
to measure) will depend wholly on its holding on long enough to attract
the _unusual_. I was there the second night (Monday, 7th) when, before a
full house--a remarkably good "money" house Alexander told me--it went
singularly well. But it's soon to see or to say, and I'm prepared for
the worst. The thing fills me with horror for the abysmal vulgarity and
brutality of the theatre and its regular public, which God knows I have
had intensely even when working (from motives as "pure" as pecuniary
motives _can_ be) against it; and I feel as if the simple freedom of
mind thus begotten to return to one's legitimate form would be simply by
itself a divine solace for everything. Don't worry about me: I'm a Rock.
If the play has no life on the stage I shall publish it; it's altogether
the best thing I've done. You would understand better the elements of
the case if you had seen the thing it followed (_The Masqueraders_) and
the thing that is now succeeding at the Haymarket--the thing of Oscar
Wilde's. On the basis of _their_ being plays, or successes, my thing is
necessarily neither. Doubtless, moreover, the want of a roaring
actuality, simplified to a few big _familiar_ effects, in my subject--an
episode in the history of an old English Catholic family in the last
century--militates against it, with all usual theatrical people, who
don't want plays (from variety and nimbleness of fancy) of different
_kinds_, like books and stories, but only of one kind, which their
stiff, rudimentary, clumsily-working vision recognizes as the kind
they've had before. And yet I had tried so to meet them! But you can't
make a sow's ear out of a silk purse.--I can't write more--and don't ask
for more details. This week will probably determine the fate of the
piece. If there is increased advance-booking it will go on. If there
isn't, it will be withdrawn, and with it all my little hope of profit.
The time one has given to such an affair from the very first to the very
last represents in all--so inconceivably great, to the uninitiated, is
the amount--a pitiful, tragic bankruptcy of hours that might have been
rendered retroactively golden. But I am not plangent--one must take the
thick with the thin--and I have such possibilities of another and better
sort before me. I am only sorry for your and Alice's having to be so
sorry for yours forever,

HENRY.




_To George Henschel._

     Answering a suggestion that H. J. should write a libretto to be set
     to music by Sir George Henschel.


34 De Vere Gardens, W.
January 22d, 1895.

My dear Henschel,

Your flattering dream is beautiful--but, I fear, alas, delusive. When I
say I 'fear' it, I mean I only too completely feel it. It is a charming
idea, but the root of the libretto is not in me. We will talk of
it--yes: because I will talk with you, with joy, of _anything_--will
even play to myself that I have convictions I haven't, for that
privilege. But I am unlyrical, unmusical, unrhythmical, unmanageable.
And I hate "old New England stories"!--which are lean and pale and poor
and ugly. But let us by all means talk--and the more the better. I am
touched by your thinking so much good of me--and I embrace you, my dear
Henschel, for such rich practical friendship and confidence. I
congratulate you afresh on your glorious wife, I await you with
impatience, and I stretch out to you across the wintry wastes the very
grateful hand of yours always,

HENRY JAMES.




_To W. D. Howells._


34 De Vere Gardens, W.
January 22d, 1895.

My dear Howells,

...I am indebted to you for your most benignant letter of December last.
It lies open before me and I read it again and am soothed and cheered
and comforted again. You put your finger sympathetically on the place
and spoke of what I wanted you to speak of. I _have_ felt, for a long
time past, that I have fallen upon evil days--every sign or symbol of
one's being in the least _wanted_, anywhere or by any one, having so
utterly failed. A new generation, that I know not, and mainly prize not,
has taken universal possession. The sense of being utterly out of it
weighed me down, and I asked myself what the future would be. All these
melancholies were qualified indeed by one redeeming reflection--the
sense of how little, for a good while past (for reasons very logical,
but accidental and temporary,) I had been producing. I _did_ say to
myself "Produce again--produce; produce better than ever, and all will
yet be well;" and there was sustenance in that so far as it went. But it
has meant much more to me since _you_ have said it--for it _is_,
practically, what you admirably say. It is exactly, moreover, what I
meant to admirably do--and have meant, all along, about this time to get
into the motion of. The whole thing, however, represents a great change
in my life, inasmuch as what is clear is that periodical publication is
practically closed to me--I'm the last hand that the magazines, in this
country or in the U.S., seem to want. I won't afflict you with the now
accumulated (during all these past years) evidence on which this
induction rests--and I have spoken of it to no creature till, at this
late day, I speak of it to you.... All this, I needn't say, is for your
segretissimo ear. What it means is that "production" for me, as
aforesaid, means production of the little _book_, pure and
simple--independent of any antecedent appearance; and, truth to tell,
now that I wholly _see_ that, and have at last accepted it, I am,
incongruously, not at all sorry. I am indeed very serene. I have always
hated the magazine form, magazine conditions and manners, and much of
the magazine company. I hate the hurried little subordinate part that
one plays in the catchpenny picture-book--and the negation of all
literature that the insolence of the picture-book imposes. The
money-difference will be great--but not so great after a bit as at
first; and the other differences will be so all to the good that even
from the economic point of view they will tend to make up for that and
perhaps finally even completely do so. It is about the distinctness of
one's _book-position_ that you have so substantially reassured me; and I
mean to do far better work than ever I have done before. I have,
potentially, improved immensely and am bursting with ideas and
subjects--though the act of composition is with me more and more slow,
painful and difficult. I shall never again write a _long_ novel; but I
hope to write six immortal short ones--and some tales of the same
quality. Forgive, my dear Howells, the cynical egotism of these
remarks--the fault of which is in your own sympathy. Don't fail me this
summer. I shall probably not, as usual, absent myself from these
islands--not be beyond the Alps as I was when you were here last. That
way Boston lies, which is the deadliest form of madness. I sent you only
last night messages of affection by dear little "Ned" Abbey, who
presently sails for N.Y. laden with the beautiful work he has been doing
for the new Boston public library. I hope you will see him--he will
speak of me competently and kindly. I wish all power to your elbow. Let
me hear as soon as there is a sound of packing. Tell Mildred I rejoice
in the memory of her. Give my love to your wife, and believe me, my dear
Howells, yours in all constancy,

HENRY JAMES.




_To William James._


34 De Vere Gardens, W.
February 2nd, 1895.

...The poor little play seems already, thank God, ancient history,
though I have lived through, in its company, the horridest four weeks of
my life. Produce a play and you will know, better than I can tell you,
how such an ordeal--odious in its essence!--is only made tolerable and
palatable by great success; and in how many ways accordingly non-success
may be tormenting and tragic, a bitterness of every hour, ramifying into
every throb of one's consciousness. Tonight the thing will have lived
the whole of its troubled little life of 31 performances, and will be
"taken off," to be followed, on Feb. 5th, by a piece by Oscar Wilde that
will have probably a very different fate. On the night of the 5th, too
nervous to do anything else, I had the ingenious thought of going to
some other theatre and seeing some other play as a means of being
coerced into quietness from 8 till 10.45. I went accordingly to the
Haymarket, to a new piece by the said O.W. that had just been
produced--"An Ideal Husband." I sat through it and saw it played with
every appearance (so far as the crowded house was an appearance) of
complete success, and _that_ gave me the most fearful apprehension. The
thing seemed to me so helpless, so crude, so bad, so clumsy, feeble and
vulgar, that as I walked away across St. James's Square to learn my own
fate, the prosperity of what I had seen seemed to me to constitute a
dreadful presumption of the shipwreck of _G.D._, and I stopped in the
middle of the Square, paralyzed by the terror of this
probability--afraid to go on and learn more. "How _can_ my piece do
anything with a public with whom _that_ is a success?" It couldn't--but
even then the full truth was, "mercifully," not revealed to me; the
truth that in a short month my piece would be whisked away to make room
for the triumphant Oscar. If, as I say, this episode has, by this time,
become ancient history to me, it is, thank heaven, because when a thing,
for me (a piece of work,) is done, it's done: I get quickly detached and
away from it, and am wholly given up to the better and fresher life of
the next thing to come. This is particularly the case now, with my
literary way blocked so long and my production smothered by these
theatrical lures: I have such arrears on hand and so many things seem to
wait for me--that I want far more and that it will be nobler to do--that
I am looking in a very different direction than in that of the
sacrificed little play. Partly for this reason, this receiving from you
all the retarded echo of my reverse and having to live over it with you
(you must excuse me if I don't do so much,) is the thing, in the whole
business, that has been most of an anguish and that I dreaded most in
advance. As for the play, in three words, it has been, I think I may
say, a rare and distinguished private success and scarcely anything at
all of a public one. By a private success, I mean with the even
moderately cultivated, civilised and intelligent _individual_, with
"people of taste" in short, of almost any kind, as distinguished from
the vast English Philistine mob--the regular "theatrical public" of
London, which, of all the vulgar publics London contains, is the most
brutishly and densely vulgar. This congregation the things they do like
sufficiently judge.... I no sooner found myself in the presence of those
yelling barbarians of the first night and learned what could be the
savagery of their disappointment that one wasn't perfectly the _same_ as
everything else they had ever seen, than the dream and delusion of my
having made a successful appeal to the cosy, childlike, naïf, domestic
British imagination (which was what I had calculated) dropped from me in
the twinkling of an eye. I saw they couldn't care one straw for a damned
young last-century English Catholic, who lived in an old-tune Catholic
world and acted, with every one else in the play, from remote and
romantic Catholic motives. The whole thing was, for them, remote, and
all the intensity of one's ingenuity couldn't make it anything else. It
has made it something else for the _few_--but that is all. Such is the
bare history of poor G.D.--which, I beg you to believe, throws no light
on my "technical skill" which isn't a light that that mystery ought to
rejoice to have thrown. The newspaper people muddle things up with the
most foredoomed crudity; and I am capable of analysing the whole thing
far more scientifically and drawing from it lessons far more pertinent
and practical than all of them put together. It is perfectly true that
the novelist has a fearful long row to hoe to get into any practical
relation to the grovelling stage, and his difficulty is precisely
double: it bears, on one side, upon the question of method and, on the
other, upon the question of subject. If he is really in earnest, as I
have been, he surmounts the former difficulty before he surmounts the
latter. I have worked like a horse--far harder than any one will ever
know--over the whole stiff mystery of "technique"--I have run it to
earth, and I don't in the least hesitate to say that, for the
comparatively poor and meagre, the piteously simplified, purposes of the
English stage, I have made it absolutely my own, put it into my pocket.
The question of realising how different is the attitude of the
theatre-goer toward the quality of thing which might be a story in a
book from his attitude toward the quality of thing that is given to him
as a story in a play is another matter altogether. _That_ difficulty is
portentous, for any writer who doesn't approach it naïvely, as only a
very limited and simple-minded writer can. One has to _make_ one's self
so limited and simple to conceive a subject, see a subject, simply
enough, and that, in a nutshell, is where I have stumbled. And yet if
you were to have seen my play! I haven't been near the theatre since the
second night, but I shall go down there late this evening to see it
buried and bid good-bye to the actors.... I am very sorry for Marion
Terry, who has delighted in her part and made the great hit of her
career, I should suppose, in it, and who has to give it up thus
untimely. Her charming acting has done much for the little run.... The
money disappointment is of course keen--as it was wholly for money I
adventured. But the poor four weeks have brought me $1,100--which shows
what a tidy sum many times four weeks would have brought; without my
lifting, as they say, after the first performance, a finger.

I have written you so long-windedly on this matter that I have left
neither time nor space for anything else. I must catch the post and will
write more sociably something by the next one. One's time, in the whole
history, has gone like water, and still it pours out. _Please_ don't
send me anything out of newspapers.

Always your
HENRY.




_To Sidney Colvin._

     The first of Stevenson's letters to be published, it will be
     remembered, were the "Vailima Letters" to Sir Sidney Colvin.


34 De Vere Gardens, W.
Feb. 19th, 1895.

My dear Colvin,

I shall send you all the Vailima Letters back to-morrow or next day by
hand. I have completely read them. I can't say, and I don't want to say,
anything of them but "Publish them--they make the man so loveable." It's
on _that_ I should take my stand. I think your estimate of them as
ranking high in their class (epistolary) is perhaps (if I remember what
you seemed to express of it) a larger one than I should concur in; but I
think still more that that makes little difference; for they will
assuredly be _liked_--immensely, and that is mainly what one is
concerned to ask for him. They are charming, living, touching,
absolutely natural; and I think _better_ toward the end than at the
beginning. What they suffer from is: 1º Want of interest and want of
clearness as to the subject-matter of much of them--the Samoan
personalities, politics, &c; all to me almost squalid--and the
irritating effect of one's sense of his clearing the very ground to be
able to do his daily work. Want also to a certain extent of
_generalization_ about all these matters and some others--into the
dreary specifics of which the reader perhaps finds himself plunged too
much. 2º A certain tormenting effect in his literary confidences (to
you,) glimpses, promises, revelations &c., arising from his so seldom
telling the subject, the _idea_ of the thing--what he sees, what he
wants to do, &c--as against his pouring forth titles, chapters,
divisions, names &c, in such magnificent abundance.--On the other hand
the personality shines out so beautiful and there are so many charming
things--passages, pages--that not to publish them would seem to me like
the burial of something alive. I see but little in what you have left in
these copies to excise on grounds of discretion, unless it be many of
those reports of the state of public affairs and allusions to public
personages which are _primarily_ excisable by reason of obscurity,
failure to appeal to reader's interest, &c. But I should like to see you
and talk about the matter with you better than thus, and shall take the
earliest occasion. The hideous sadness of them--to _us_! To readers at
large--no. But I feel as though I had been sitting with him for hours.

Yours always,
HENRY JAMES.




_To Mrs. John L. Gardner._


Royal Hospital, Dublin.
March 23d, 1895.

Dear Isabella Gardner,

Yes, I have delayed hideously to write to you, since receiving your note
of many days ago. But I always delay hideously, and my shamelessness is
rapidly becoming (in the matter of letter-writing) more disgraceful even
than my procrastination. I brought your letter with me to Ireland more
than a fortnight ago with every intention of answering it on the morrow
of my arrival; but I have been leading here a strange and monstrous life
of demoralisation and frivolity and the fleeting hour has mocked, till
today, at my languid effort to stay it, to clutch it, in its passage. I
have been paying three monstrous visits in a row; and if I needed any
further demonstration of the havoc such things make in my life I should
find it in this sense of infidelity to a charming friendship of so many
years.

I return to England to enter a monastery for the rest of my days--and
crave your forgiveness before I take this step. I have been staying in
this queer, shabby, sinister, sordid place (I mean Dublin,) with the
Lord Lieutenant (poor young Lord Houghton,) for what is called (a
fragment, that is, of what is called) the "Castle Season," and now I am
domesticated with very kind and valued old friends, the Wolseleys--Lord
W. being commander of the forces here (that is, head of the little
English army of occupation in Ireland--a five-years appointment) and
domiciled in this delightfully quaint and picturesque old structure, of
Charles II's time--a kind of Irish Invalides or Chelsea Hospital--a
retreat for superannuated veterans, out of which a commodious and
stately residence has been carved. We live side by side with the 140
old red-coated cocked-hatted pensioners--but with a splendid great
rococo hall separating us, in which Lady Wolseley gave the other night
the most beautiful ball I have ever seen--a fancy-ball in which all the
ladies were Sir Joshuas, Gainsboroughs, or Romneys, and all the men in
uniform, court dress or evening hunt dress. (_I_ went as--guess
what!--alas, nothing smarter than the one black coat in the room.) It is
a world of generals, aide-de-camps and colonels, of military colour and
sentinel-mounting, which amuses for the moment and makes one reflect
afresh that in England those who _have_ a good time have it with a
vengeance. The episode at the tarnished and ghost-haunted Castle was
little to my taste, and was a very queer episode indeed--thanks to the
incongruity of a vice-regal "court" (for that's what it considers
itself) utterly boycotted by Irish (landlord) society--the present
viceroy being the nominee of a home-rule government, and reduced to
dreary importation from England to fill its gilded halls. There was a
ball every night, etc., but too much standing on one's hind-legs--too
much pomp and state--for nothing and nobody. On my return (two days
hence) to my humble fireside I get away again as quickly as possible
into the country--to a cot beside a rill, the address of which no man
knoweth. There I remain for the next six months to come; and nothing of
any sort whatever is to happen to me (this is all arranged,) save that
you are to come down and stay a day or two with me when you come to
England. There is, alas, to be no "abroad" for me this year. I rejoice
with you in _your_ Rome--but my Rome is in the buried past. I spent,
however, last June there, and was less excruciated than I feared. Have
you seen my old friend Giuseppe Primoli--a great friend, in particular,
of the Bourgets? I dare say you have breakfasted deep with him. May
this find you perched on new conquests. It's vain to ask you to write
me, or tell me, anything. Let me only ask you therefore to believe me
your very affectionate old friend.

HENRY JAMES.




_To Arthur Christopher Benson._

     The excursion to Windsor was one of several on which H. J.
     conducted Alphonse Daudet and his family during their visit to
     England this spring. The "adorable cottage" was the house then
     occupied by Mr. Benson as a master at Eton.


34 De Vere Gardens, W.
May 11th [1895].

My dear Arthur B.

A quelque chose malheur est bon: my very natural failure to find you
brought me your engaging letter. Strike, but hear me. I knew but too
well that it would not seem felicitous to you that I should leave a mere
card at your ravishing bower: but please believe that I had no
alternative. I weighed the question of notifying you in advance--weighed
it anxiously; but the scale against it was pressed down by overwhelming
considerations. Daudet is so unwell and fatigable and unable to walk or
to mount steps or stairs (he could do Windsor Castle only from the
carriage,) that I didn't know he would pull through the excursion at
all--and I thought it unfair to inflict on you the awkward problem of
his getting, or not getting, into your house--of his getting over to
Eton at all--and of the five other members of his family being hurled
upon you. We had, in fact, only just time to catch our return train.
Still, I had a sneaking romantic _hope_ of you. I should have liked
them, hungry for the great show, to behold you! As I turned sadly from
your "adorable cottage" and got back into the carriage A. D. said to
me--having waited contemplatively during my conference with your
domestic: "Ah, si vous saviez comme ces petits coins d'Angleterre
m'amusent!" A. C. B. would have amused him still more. Content yourself,
for the hour, my dear Arthur Benson, with "amusing" a humbler master of
Dichtung--and an equal one, perhaps, of Wahrheit. I am delighted you
have been thinking of me--and beg you to be sure that _whenever_ you
happen to do so, Telepathy, as you say, will happen to be in it! This
time, e.g., it was intensely in it--for you had been peculiarly present
to me all these last days in connection with my alternations of writing
to you or not writing to you about the projected Thursday at Windsor. I
wanted to confine myself to the pure feasible for Daudet, and yet I
wanted (still more) to write to you "anyway," as they say in the U. S.
And I _am_ writing to you--q.e.d. So there we are. I rejoice in a
certain air of happiness in your letter. Dine with you some day? De
grand cœur--after a little--after the very lively practical
pre-occupation of the presence of my helpless and bewildered Gauls has
abated. There is a late train from Windsor that would put me back after
dinner--unless I err. Your mother has kindly invited me to a party on
the 16th and I shall certainly go--if I survive (and return from) the
process of taking Daudet down to see G. Meredith at Box Hill--which has
been fixed for that day. You won't be there (at Lambeth) I ween--but if
you _were_, what possibilities (of the order hinted at above) we might
discuss in a Gothic embrasure!

Respond--respond, if ever so briefly, to yours, my dear Arthur Benson,
for ever,

HENRY JAMES.




_To W. E. Norris._

     The "American outbreak" was the trouble over the question of the
     Venezuelan frontier. The articles in the _Times_ by the late G. W.
     Smalley (correspondent for the journal in New York) did much, in H.
     J.'s view, to preserve the relations between England and the United
     States during this difficult time.


34 De Vere Gardens, W.
Feb. 4th [1896].

My dear Norris,

Your letter is as good as the chair by your study-table (betwixt it, as
it were, and the tea-stand) used to be; and as that luxurious piece of
furniture shall (D.V.) be again. Your news, your hand, your voice
sprinkle me--most refreshingly--with the deep calm of Torquay. It is in
short in every way good to hear from you, so that, behold, for your
sweet sake, I perpetrate that intensest of my favourite immoralities--I
snatch the epistolary, the disinterested pen before (at 10 a.m.)
squaring my poor old shoulders over the painful instrument that I fondly
try to believe to be lucrative. It _isn't_--but one must keep up the
foolish fable to the end. I am having in these difficult conditions a
very decent winter. It is mild, and it isn't wet--not here and now; and
it is--for me--thanks to more than Machiavellian cunning, more
dinnerless than it has, really, ever been. My fireside really knows me
on some evenings. I forsake it too often--but a little less and less. So
you bloom and smack your lips, while I shrivel and tighten my waistband.
In spite of my gain of private quiet I have suffered acutely by my loss
of public. The American outbreak has darkened all my sky--and made me
feel, among many other things, how long I have lived away from my native
land, how long I _shall_ (D.V.!) live away from it and how little I
understand it today. The explosion of jingoism there is the result of
all sorts of more or less domestic and internal conditions--and what is
most indicated, on the whole, as coming out of it, is a vast new split
or cleavage in American national feeling--politics and parties--a split
almost, roughly speaking, between the West and the East. There are
really two civilisations there side by side--in one yoke; or rather one
civilisation and a barbarism. All the expressions of feeling _I_ have
received from the U.S. (since this hideous row) have been, intensely, of
course, from the former. It is, on the whole, the stronger force; but
only on condition of its fighting hard. But I think it _will_ fight
hard. Meanwhile, the whole thing sickens me. That unfortunately,
however, is not a reason for its not being obviously there. It's there
all the while. But let it not be any more _here_: I mean in this
scribblement. My admiration of Smalley is boundless, and my appreciation
and comfort and gratitude. He has really _done_ something--and will do
more--for peace and decency.

I went yesterday to Leighton's funeral--a wonderful and slightly curious
public demonstration--the streets all cleared and lined with police, the
day magnificent (his characteristic good fortune to the end;) and St.
Paul's very fine to the eye and crammed with the _whole_ London
world.... The music was fine and severe, but I thought wanting in volume
and force--thin and meagre for the vast space. But what do I know?

No, my dear Norris, I _don't_ go abroad--I go on May 1st into the depths
(somewhere) of old England. A response to that proposal I spoke to you
of (from Rome) is utterly impossible to me now.... I've two novels to
write before I can _dream_ of anything else; and to go abroad is to
plunge into the fiery furnace of people. So either Devonshire or some
other place will be my six months' lot. I must take a house, this
time--a small and cheap one--and I must (deride me not) be somewhere
where I can, without disaster, bicycle. Also I must be a little nearer
town than last year. I'm afraid these things rather menace Torquay. But
it's soon to say--I must wait. I shall decide in April--or by
mid-March--only. Meanwhile things will clear up. I'm intensely, thank
heaven, busy. I will, I think, send you the little magazine tale over
which (I mean over whose number of words--infinite and awful) I
struggled so, in Sept. and Oct. last, under your pitying eye and with
your sane and helpful advice. It comes in to me this a.m.

...I hope your daughter is laying up treasure corporeal in Ireland. I
like _your_ dinners--even I mean in the houses of the other hill-people;
and I beg you to feel yourself clung to for ever by yours irrepressibly,

HENRY JAMES.




_To William James._


Point Hill,
Playden, Rye.

July 24th, 1896.

My dear William,

...I wrote you at some length not very long since, and my life has been,
here, so peaceful that nothing has happened to me since save an incident
terminated this a.m.--a charming little visit (of 24 hours) from Wendell
Holmes, who was in admirable youth, spirits, health and "form," and
whose presence I greatly enjoyed. He is--or has been--having his usual
social triumphs in London, was as vivid and beautiful as ever about
them--also seems to enjoy much _this_ humble but picturesque little
place and sails for the U.S. on Aug. 22nd. Save that he seems to see you
rarely and precariously, he will carry you good news of me. I have only
five days more of Point Hill, alas--but I have solved the problem of not
returning on Aug. 1st to the stifling London (we are having a summer of
transcendent droughts and heat--like last, only more so,) and not on the
other hand sacrificing precious days to hunting up another
refuge--solved it by taking, for two months, the Vicarage at Rye, which
is shabby, fusty--a sad drop from P.H., but close at hand to this (15
minutes walk,) and has much of the same picturesque view (from a small
terrace garden behind--a garden to sit in, and more or less, as here, to
_eat_ in) and almost the same very moderate _loyer_. It has also more
room, and more tumblers and saucepans, and above all, at a moment when I
am intensely busy, saves me a wasteful research. So I shall be there
from the 29th of this month till the last week in September. "_The
Vicarage, Rye, Sussex_," is my address. The place, unfortunately, isn't
quite up to the pretty suggestion of the name. But this little corner of
the land endears itself to me--and the peace of the country is a balm.
It is all, about here, most mild and mellow and loveable--too
"relaxing," but that is partly the exceptional summer. I have been able,
_every_ evening, for three months, to dine, at _8_, on my little
terrace. So the climate of England is, literally, not always to be
sneezed at. But the absence of rain threatens a water-famine, and the
"tub" is a short allowance. With Chocorua let, I am at a loss to place
you all, and only hope you are succeeding better in placing yourselves.
It would delight me to hear that Alice is "boarding" somewhere with
Peggy and the afflicted infant whom I refuse to denominate "Tweedy." I
hope, at any rate, she is getting rest and refreshment of some sort.
There would be room for two or three of you at my Vicarage--I wish you
were here to feel the repose of it. May your summer be merciful and your
lectures _on ne peut plus suivies_. I say nothing about the political
bear-garden--I fear I pusillanimously keep out of it. I am well (absit
omen) and interested in what I _am_ in--and I embrace you all. Ever your
affectionate

HENRY.




_To Edmumd Gosse._

     _The Spoils of Poynton_ (under the title of _The Old Things_) had
     begun to appear in the _Atlantic Monthly_ in April 1896.


The Vicarage,
Rye.

August 28th, 1896.

My dear Edmund,

Don't think me a finished brute or a heartless fiend or a soulless one,
or any other unhappy thing with a happy name. I have pressed your letter
to my bosom again and again, and if I've not sooner expressed to you how
I've prized it, the reason has simply been that for the last month there
has been no congruity between my nature and my manners--between my
affections and my lame right hand. A crisis overtook me some three weeks
ago from which I emerge only to hurl myself on this sheet of paper and
consecrate it to _you_. I will reserve details--suffice it that in an
evil hour I began to pay the penalty of having arranged to let a current
serial begin when I was too little ahead of it, and when it proved a
much slower and more difficult job than I expected. The printers and
illustrators overtook and denounced me, the fear of breaking down
paralysed me, the combination of rheumatism and fatigue rendered my
hand and arm a torture--and the total situation made my existence a
nightmare, in which I answered not a single note, letting correspondence
go to smash in order barely to save my honour. I've finished (day before
yesterday,) but I fear my honour--with _you_--lies buried in the ruin of
all the rest. You will soon be coming home, and this will meet or reach
you God only knows when. Let it take you the assurance that the most
lurid thing in my dreams has been the glitter of your sarcastic
spectacles. It was charming of you to write to me from dear little old
devastated Vevey--as to which indeed you make me feel, in a few vivid
touches, a faint nostalgic pang. I don't want to think of you as still
in your horrid ice-world (for it is cold even here and I scribble by a
morning fire;) and yet it's in my interest to suppose you still feeling
so all abroad that these embarrassed lines will have for you some of the
charm of the bloated English post. That makes me, at the same time,
doubly conscious that I've nothing to tell you that you will most
languish for--news of the world and the devil--no throbs nor thrills
from the great beating heart of the thick of things. I went to town for
a week on the 15th, to be nearer the devouring maw into which I had to
pour belated copy; but I spent the whole time shut up in De Vere Gardens
with an inkpot and a charwoman. The only thing that befell me was that I
dined one night at the Savoy with F. Ortmans and the P. Bourgets--and
that the said Bourgets--but two days in London--dined with me one night
at the Grosvenor club. But these occasions were not as rich in incident
and emotion as poetic justice demanded--and your veal-fed table d'hôte
will have nourished your intelligence quite as much. The only other
thing I did was to read in the Revue de Paris of the 15th Aug. the
wonderful article of A. Daudet on Goncourt's death--a little miracle of
art, adroitness, demoniac tact and skill, and taste so abysmal, judged
by _our_ fishlike sense, that there is no getting alongside of it at
all. But I grieve to say I can't send you the magazine--I saw it only at
a club. Doubtless you will have come across it. I have this ugly house
till the end of September and don't expect to move from Rye even for a
day till then. The date of your return is vague to me--but if it should
be early in the month I wonder if you couldn't come down for another
Sunday. I fear you will be too blasé, much. For comfort my Vicarage is
distinctly superior to my eagle's nest--but, alas, beauty isn't in it.
The peace and prettiness of the whole land, here, however, has been good
to me, and I stay on with unabated relish. But I stay in solitude. I
don't see a creature. That, too, dreadful to relate, I like. You will
have been living in a crowd, and I expect you to return all garlanded
and odorous with anecdote and reminiscence. Mrs Nelly's will all bear, I
trust, on miraculous healings and feelings. I feel far from all access
to the French volume you recommend. Are you crawling over the Dorn, or
only standing at the bottom to catch Philip and Lady Edmund as they
drop? Pardon my poverty and my paucity. It is your absence that makes
them. Yours, my dear Edmund, not inconstantly,

HENRY JAMES.




_To Jonathan Sturges._


34 De Vere Gardens, W.
Thursday [Nov. 5, 1896].

My dear Jonathan,

I spill over, this a.m., in a certain amount of jubilation--all the more
that I have your little letter of the other day to thank you for. One
breathes, I suppose--the alarmed, anxious, prudent part of one. But I
don't feel that McKinley is the _end_ of anything--least of all of big
provincial iniquities and abuses and bloody billionaires. However he's
more decent than the alternative--and your fortune will flow in, more
regularly; and mine will permit me to say I'm delighted you "accept,"
and shall see that the cold mutton is not too much "snowed under" before
you come. Only give me a few--three or four if possible--days' notice:
then we will talk of many things--and among them of Rudyard Kipling's
"Seven Seas," which he has just sent me and which I will send you
tomorrow or next day (kindly guard it,) on the assumption that you won't
have seen it. I am laid low by the absolutely uncanny talent--the
prodigious special faculty of it. It's all _violent_, without a dream of
a _nuance_ or a hint of "distinction"; all prose trumpets and castanets
and such--with never a touch of the fiddle-string or a note of the
nightingale. But it's magnificent and masterly in its way, and full of
the most insidious art. He's a rum 'un--and one of the very few first
_talents_ of the time. There's a vilely idiotic reference to his
"coarseness" in this a.m.'s _Chronicle_. The coarseness of the _The Mary
Gloster_ is absolutely one of the most triumphant "values" of that
triumphant thing. How lovely, in these sweet days, your Haslemere
hermitage must be! I hope you've still the society of your young
friend--it eases the mind of your old one. What you said about Howells
most true--he is very touching. And I feel so _remote_ from him! The
little red book is extremely charming. Write to me. Tout à vous,

HENRY JAMES.




_To W. E. Norris._


34 De Vere Gardens, W.
Dec. 23rd, 1896.

My dear Norris,

I respond with joy to your suggestion in your beautiful letter of two
days ago--that I shall enable you to find a word from me on your table
on the darkest a. m. of the year; in the first place because I am much
touched by your attaching to any word of mine any power to comfort or
charm; and in the second because I can well measure--by my own--your
sense of a melancholy from which you must appeal. It is indeed a
lugubrious feast and a miserable merriment. But it is something to spend
the evil season by one's own poor hearthstone (save that yours is
opulent), crouching over the embers and chuckling low over all the
dreadful places where one is not! I've been literally pressed to go to
two or three--one of them in Northumberland! (the cheek of some people!)
and the reflection that I _might_ be there and yet by heaven's mercy am
not, does give a faint blush as of the rose to my otherwise deep
depression. It is a mild, gray, rainless, sunless inoffensive sort of
Xmas here--and the shop fronts look rather prettily pink and green and
golden in the dear dirty old London streets--and I have ventured into
three or four--but _I_ do it, bless you, for nine and sevenpence
half-penny, all told! No wonder you want epistolary balm if you're
already in the fifties! Do you give them diamond necklaces and Arab
horses all round?--But Torquay, I too intensely felt, has gorgeous ways
of its own. Really it isn't bad here, for almost every one has left
town. I have yet had nothing worse to suffer than a first night at the
Lyceum--the too great Irvingism of which--mainly in Ellen Terry's
box--had been, the same day, pleasantly mitigated, in advance, by Tessa
Gosse in Sheridan's _Critic_. Tessa had a play and acted Mr Puff better
than any of her blushing fellow-nymphs acted anything else. And on New
Year's eve I go to her parents for a carouse of some sort, and until
then, thank God! I don't dine out save on Xmas day. Nor in 1897--by all
that's holy! _ever_ again! I have been quite smothered with it these two
months--and it's getting far beyond a joke.... I see no literary fry,
and languish in incorrigible obscurity. I had a fevered dream that _The
Other House_ might reach a second edition--but it declines to do
anything of the sort, and the pauper's grave continues to yawn.
Nevertheless--as it is assured any way--I _may_ go to Italy on April
1st. Meanwhile, my dear Norris, I think of you with a degree of envy
which even the manners of Topper scarce avail to diminish--I mean
because you have a beautiful home and are so many miles nearer than I am
to nature. You are also nearer to Miss Norris, and that is another
advantage, even though it does make a hole in £50! I have nothing better
to offer her on Xmas a.m. than the very friendly handshake of yours and
hers, my dear Norris, affectionately and always,

HENRY JAMES.




_To Arthur Christopher Benson._


34 De Vere Gardens, W.
December 28th, 1896.

My dear Arthur,

Your generous letter has, this wild, mild, soft, sombre morning, made me
feel as if I were standing beside you, with my hand on your shoulder, in
an embrasure of one of the windows--at that fine old Farnham Castle that
I have seen (years ago)--that look out on the noble things you speak
of. And the communication in question is worthy, exactly, of the
_things_ in question; and grave and handsome and interesting and
touching even as they are. "Burn" it, quotha!--it _wouldn't_ have burnt,
I would have you know: it would have flown straight up the chimney and
taken, unscathed as marble, its invulnerable way to the individual for
whom it had just been so admirably winged. You say to me exactly the
right things, and you say them to exactly the right person. I can't tell
you how glad I am for you that you have all that highest sanity and
soundness (though it isn't as if I doubted it!) of emotion, full, frank
and deep. If there be a wisdom in not feeling--to the last throb--the
great things that happen to us, it is a wisdom I shall never either know
or esteem. Let your soul live--it's the only life that isn't, on the
whole, a sell. You have evidently been magnificent, and as I have my
hand on your shoulder I take the opportunity of patting you very
tenderly on the back. That back will evidently carry its load and be all
the straighter for the--as it seems to me--really quite massive
experience. I rejoice that the waters have held you up--they do, always,
I think, when they are only deep _enough_. And all your missings and
memories and contrasts and tendernesses are a part--the essence--of the
very force that is in you to live, and to feel again--and yet again and
again; when, at last, to _have_ so felt will be the thing in the world
you'll be gladdest to have done.

I don't know, in spite of your compliment, whether I _am_ much like
Gray, save in the devil of a time it takes me to do a thing. What keeps
me incommunicative, however, is not indifference, but almost a kind of
suspense, a fear to break--by speaking--the spell of some _other_
spectacle--other than that of my own _fonctionnement_. But I respond to
the lightest touch of a friendly hand, I think I may say; and I haven't
the slightest fear of breaking any spell in saying--to you--that I seem
to myself just now (absit omen!) to _fonctionner_ pretty well. I am as
occupied and preoccupied with work as even _my_ technical temper can
desire, and out of it something not irremediably nauseating will not
improbably spring! I never had more intentions--what do I say?--more
ferocities; I am sitting in my boat and my oars rhythmically creak. In
short I propose to win my little battle--and even believe, more than
hitherto, that I may annex my little province. It will be as small as
the Grand Duchy of Pumpernickel--but there will be room to put up a
friend. Therefore you must come and stay with me there; in fact I give
you rendez-vous on the battlefield itself, the moment the day is
declared. I mix my metaphors--but it all means that it's _all_ a fight
and that the only thing that changes is our fighting train. Let us then
fight side by side, never too far out of sight.

How I congratulate you on the value of your friends; I mean the
particular Davidsons. I don't know them, but I like them for liking you.
I think I have a strong sense, too, of the beauty and charm of many of
the conditions in which you are engaged and which have a really
decorative effect--so that the aesthetic sense too is pleased--on
everything that makes you minister to the confidence, my dear Arthur, of
yours very constantly,

HENRY JAMES.




_To the Viscountess Wolseley._

     The reference in the following letter is to a visit paid by H. J.,
     with Lady Wolseley, to the elaborately beautiful old house of the
     late C. E. Kempe, the well-known artist of church-decoration, at
     Lindfield, Sussex.


_Dictated._

34 De Vere Gardens, W.
8th March, 1897.

Dear Lady Wolseley,

I was so deprived, yesterday, for all those beautiful hours, of a word
with you away from our host that I felt as if I didn't say to you a
tenth of what I wanted; which, however, will make it all the better for
our next meeting--when I shall overflow like a river fed by melting
snows. Let these few words, therefore, not anticipate the deluge--let
them only express to you afresh my grateful sense of the interest and
success of our excursion. The whole wonder of it was the greater through
my wholly unprepared state, my antecedent inward blank--which blank is
now overscored with images and emotions as thick as any page of any of
your hospitable house-books ever was with visitors' names. The man
himself made the place more wonderful and the place the man. I was
greatly affected by his courtesy and charm; and I got afterwards, in the
evening, a little of the light that I couldn't snatch from you under his
nose. What struck me most about the whole thing was the consummate
cleverness: _that_ was the note it sounded for me more than any one of
the notes more imposing, more deep, that an artistic creation _may_
throw out. Don't for the world--and for my ruin--ever breathe to him I
have said it; but the whole thing, and his taste, are far too Germanic,
too Teutonic, a business to make a medium in which I could ever sink
down in final peace or take as the domestic and decorative last word.
The element of France and Italy are too much out of it--and they, to me,
are the real secret of Style. But we will talk of these things--heaven
speed the day. Do have a little of France and a great deal of Italy at
South Wraxall; but do have also a great deal of the cunning Kempe and of
the candid--too candid--companion of your pilgrimage. Don't imagine the
companion didn't have a most sweet and glorious day--from which the
light, even in London dusk again, has not yet wholly faded. I hope your
security was complete to the end, and I am, in earnest hope also of a
speedy reunion, yours, dear Lady Wolseley, more gratefully, if possible,
than ever,

HENRY JAMES.




_To Miss Frances R. Morse._

     H. J.'s admiration for St. Gaudens's memorial to Col. R. G. Shaw,
     when he afterwards saw it at Boston, found expression, it will be
     remembered, in _The American Scene_.


_Dictated._

34 De Vere Gardens, W.
June 7th, 1897.

My dear Fanny,

I have, as usual, endless unacknowledged benefits to thank you for after
too many days. The last is your letter of the end of March, full of
interesting substance as always and of things that no one else has the
imagination or the inspiration to tell me. (My allusion to the
imagination there is not, believe me, an imputation on your exactitude.
The light of truth, of good solid vivid Boston truth, shines in each of
your pages.) Especially are you interesting and welcome, as I have told
you before, I think, on the young generations and full-blown, though
new, existences, that are in possession of a scene I knew as otherwise
occupied. All the old names--or most of them--appear to be represented
by the remote posterity of my old acquaintance. In this remote
posterity, however, I take an interest--and scraps and specimens of it,
even here, occasionally flash past me....

I have stayed on in town later than for some years past, and though I
had, at the end of March, all my plans made to go to Italy, have put it
off till so late that, in a few days, I shall have to be content with
simply crossing to Paris and seeing then what is to be further done.
London is given up to carpenters and seat-mongers--being prepared, on an
enormous scale and a rather unsightly way, for the "circus" of the 22nd.
The circus is already, amid the bare benches and the mere _bousculade_
of the preparations, a thing to fly from--in spite of the good young
George Vanderbilt's having offered me an ample share of a beautiful
balcony in Pall Mall to see it from. I shall spend the next few weeks in
some place or places, north of the Alps, as yet utterly undefined, and
be back in England before the summer is over. The voice of Venice, all
this time, has called very loud. But it has been drowned a good deal in
the click of the typewriter to which I dictate and which, some months
ago, crept into my existence through the crevice of a lame hand and now
occupies in it a place too big to be left vacant for long periods of
hotel and railway life. All this time I am not coming to the great
point, which is my hope that you may have been able to be present (I
believe with all my heart of course you were) at the revelation of the
Shaw Memorial. In charity, my dear Fanny, if this be the case, do write
me a frank word about it. I heard from William and Alice more or less on
the eve, but I fear they will have afterwards--just now be having--too
much to do to be able to send me many echoes. I daresay that you will,
for that matter, already have sent me one. I receive, as it happens,
only this morning, a copy of Harper's Weekly with a big reproduction of
St. Gaudens's bas-relief, which strikes me as extraordinarily beautiful
and noble. How I rejoice that something really fine is to stand there
forever for R. G. S.--and for all the rest of them. This thing of St.
G.'s strikes me as a real perfection, and I have appealed to William to
send me the finest and biggest photograph of it that can be found--for
such surely have been taken. How your spiritual lungs must, over it all,
have filled themselves with the air of the old wartime. Even here--I
mean simply in the depths of one's own being--I myself, for an hour,
seem to breathe it again. But the strange thing is that however much, in
memory and imagination, it may live for one again, with all its dim
figures and ghosts and reverberations and emotions, it appears to belong
yet to some far away _other_ world and state of being. I talked of this
the other day with Sara Darwin, whose memories are so much identical
with my own, and it was a relief to do so--in the absence of all other
communications: that absence produced by the up-growth, since, of a
whole generation, which began after the end and for which the whole
history is as alien as the battles of Alexander. But I am writing you a
long letter when I only meant to wave you a hand of greeting and
gratitude. Correspondence is rather heavy to me, for I can tackle it
only in the margin of time left over after the other matters that my
machine has to grind. I hope your summer promises, and in the midst of a
peculiar degree, at the present moment, of smoky London stuffiness, I
envy you--for I see you in the mind's eye at Beverly--the element of
wide verandahs, cut peaches--I mean peaches and cream, you know--white
frocks and Atlantic airs. You make me, my dear Fanny, in these high
lights, quite incredibly homesick.... Yours very constantly,

HENRY JAMES.




_To Mrs. George Hunter._

     Instead of going abroad for the summer, as he had proposed, H. J.
     went first to Bournemouth, and from there to join his cousin, Mrs.
     George Hunter, and her daughters at Dunwich, near Saxmundham.


Bath Hotel, Bournemouth.
Saturday [July 3, 1897].

Dearest Elly,

It is an immense satisfaction to get your news--and no figure of speech
to say that it has found me literally on the point of reaching out, for
it, into the thick twilight of your whereabouts. I have had my general
silence much on my conscience--and especially my dumbness and darkness
to Rosina and Bay, for whom my movements must have been enveloped in a
perfidious mystery that has caused me, I fear, to forfeit all their
esteem. But let me tell you first of all how I rejoice in your good
conditions and in your having found your feet. It was "borne in" upon
me, on general grounds, that Southwold would never do for long, and it
is charming that you have found so near and so nice a substitute. I
especially delight (without wanting to sacrifice the rest of you) in
such a letting-down-easy of the Art-Daughters. Please give them my
tender love and tell them that, preposterous as it sounds, I have never,
all this time, and in spite of the rosiest asseverations, crossed the
channel at all. The nearest I have come to it is to have, early last
month, come down here to the edge of the sea and collapsed into the
peace and obscurity of this convenient corner (long familiar to me,)
which, having a winter season, is practically empty at present. I will
tell R. and B. when I see them just how it was that I happened to be so
false--it is too long a story now. Suffice it that my reasons (for
continuing to hug this fat country) were overwhelming, and my regrets
(at not tasting of their brave Bohemia) of the sharpest. Moreover all's
well that ends well. If I _had_ gone abroad I should be abroad now and
the rest of the summer; and therefore unable to join you on your Suffolk
shore--or at least alight upon you there--which is what I shall be
enchanted to do. You describe a little Paradise--houris and all; and I
beseech you to keep a divan for me there. The only thing is that I fear
I shan't be able to come till toward the end--or _by_ the end--of the
month. I have more or less engaged myself (to a pair of friends who are
coming down here next week for my--strange as it may seem--sweet sake)
to remain on this spot till toward the 25th. But I will come then, and
stay as long as you will let me. If you can _bespeak_ any quarters for
me at the inn, in advance, I will take it very kindly of you. Can they
give me a little _sitting-room_ as well as a bed-room? If you can
achieve any effective [word illegible] at them to do so I shall be very
grateful. I always _need_ some small literary bower other than the
British bed-room--and in this case I would of course "meal" there, as
that makes them always more zealous. I don't know the East Coast to
speak of at all--and I can imagine no more winsome introduction to it. I
quite yearn to commune with the young Parisians. Bravo, McMonnies. Bravo
everybody--especially Grenville. How I shall joy to frolic with him in
the sand! Have they seen--the art-daughters--the image of the St.
Gaudens Shaw? It is altogether great. William's oration was a
first-class success. I encircle you all and will write again!

Ever, my dear Elly, so constantly yours,

HENRY JAMES.

P.S. The oddest trio of coincidences yesterday afternoon. I was reading
the delightful Letters of that peculiarly Suffolk genius (of Woodbridge)
Edward FitzGerald ("Omar Khayyam") and, just finishing a story in one of
them about his relations with a boatman of Saxmundham (a name--seen for
the first time--that struck me--by its strangeness and handsomeness,)
laid down the book and went a long walk--five miles along this coast, to
where, in a very picturesque and lonely spot, I met a sea-faring man
with whom I fraternised.

"Do you belong to this place?"

"Oh no. I've been here five years; but I come from the Suffolk
coast--Saxmundham."

"Did you know Mr. FitzGerald?"

"Know him? My brother was his boatman!"--and he tells me the story! Then
I walk home and coming in, find your letter on my table. I tear it open
and the first word I see in it--in your date--is _Saxmundham_!
Tableau!!! It never rains but it pours!--




_To Edward Warren._

     On returning from Dunwich--it was there that he had been bicycling
     with Mr. Warren--H. J. heard that Lamb House, which he had seen and
     admired at Rye the year before, was unexpectedly vacant. He at once
     appealed to Mr. Warren for professional advice with regard to the
     condition of the house, and as this proved satisfactory, secured it
     without delay.


_Dictated._

34 De Vere Gardens, W.
15th September, 1897.

My dear Edward,

Very kindly read, for me, the enclosed--which throws an odd coincidental
light on the very house we talked of, day before yesterday (or was it
yesterday?) as we bumped and bounced and vainly shifted sides. The place
in question is none other than the mansion with the garden-house perched
on the wall; and though to be fairly confronted with the possibility and
so brought to the point is a little like a blow in the stomach, what I
am minded to say to you is that perhaps you may have a chance to tell
me, on Friday, that you will be able to take some day next week to give
me the pleasure of going down there with me for a look. I feel as if I
couldn't _think_ on the subject at all without seeing it--the
subject--again; and there would be no such seeing it as seeing it in
your company. Perhaps I shall have speech of you long enough on Friday
to enable us to settle a day. _I_ should be capable of Monday. I hope
you slid gently home and are fairly on all fours--that is on hands and
feet--again. What a day we should have had again also--I mean this
one--if we had kept it up! But basta così!--it does beautifully for
your journey. A thousand friendships to Margaret. Always yours,

HENRY JAMES.




_To Arthur Christopher Benson._

     The following refers to a manuscript diary of Mr. Benson's and to
     the privately printed _Letters and Journals_ of William Cory,
     author of _Ionica_.


34 De Vere Gardens, W.
September 25th, 1897.

My dear Arthur,

Send me by all means the Diary to which you so kindly allude--nothing
could give me greater pleasure than to feel I might freely--and yet so
responsibly--handle it. I hope it contains a record of your Hawarden
talk--of which you speak.

I shall be very glad indeed of a talk with you about W. Cory--my
impression of whom, on the book, you deepen--whenever anything so
utterly unlikely as articulate speech between us miraculously comes to
pass.--I am just drawing a long breath from having signed--a few moments
since--a most portentous parchment: the lease of a smallish, charming,
cheap old house in the country--down at Rye--for _21_ years! (One would
think I was _your_ age!) But it is exactly what I want and secretly and
hopelessly coveted (since knowing it) without dreaming it would ever
fall. But it _has_ fallen--and has a beautiful room for you (the "King's
Room"--George II's--who slept there;) together with every promise of
yielding me an indispensable retreat from May to October. I hope you are
not more sorry to take up the load of life that awaits, these days, the
hunch of one's shoulders than _I_ am. You'll ask me what I mean by
"life." Come down to Lamb House and I'll tell you. And open the private
page, my dear Arthur, to yours very eagerly,

HENRY JAMES.




_To Mrs. William James._


_Dictated._

34 De Vere Gardens, W.
1st December, 1897.

Dearest Alice,

It's too hideous and horrible, this long time that I have not written
you and that your last beautiful letter, placed, for reminder, well
within sight, has converted all my emotion on the subject into a
constant, chronic blush. The reason has been that I have been driving
very hard for another purpose this inestimable aid to expression, and
that, as I have a greater loathing than ever for the mere manual act, I
haven't, on the one side, seen my way to inflict on you a written
letter, or on the other had the virtue to divert, till I should have
finished my little book, to another stream any of the valued and
expensive industry of my amanuensis. I _have_, at last, finished my
little book--that is _a_ little book, and so have two or three mornings
of breathing-time before I begin another. Le plus clair of this small
interval "I consecrate to thee!"

I am settled in London these several weeks and making the most of that
part of the London year--the mild, quiet, grey stretch from the
mid-October to Christmas--that I always find the pleasantest, with the
single defect of its only not being long enough. We are having,
moreover, a most creditable autumn; no cold to speak of and almost no
rain, and a morning-room window at which, this December 1st, I sit with
my scribe, admitting a radiance as adequate as that in which you must be
actually bathed, and probably more mildly golden. I have no positive
plan save that of just ticking the winter swiftly away on this most
secure basis. There are, however, little doors ajar into a possible
brief absence. I fear I have just closed one of them rather ungraciously
indeed, in pleading a "non possumus" to a most genial invitation from
John Hay to accompany him and his family, shortly after the new year,
upon a run to Egypt and a month up the Nile; he having a boat for that
same--I mean for the Nile part--in which he offers me the said month's
entertainment. It is a very charming opportunity, and I almost blush at
not coming up to the scratch; especially as I shall probably never have
the like again. But it isn't so simple as it sounds; one has on one's
hands the journey to Cairo and back, with whatever seeing and doing by
the way two or three irresistible other things, to which one would feel
one might never again be so near, would amount to. (I mean, of course,
then or never, on the return, Athens, Corfu, Sicily the never-seen,
etc., etc.) It would all "amount" to too much this year, by reason of a
particular little complication--most pleasant in itself, I hasten to
add--that I haven't, all this time, mentioned to you. Don't be scared--I
haven't accepted an "offer." I have only taken, a couple of months ago,
a little old house in the country--for the rest of my days!--on which,
this winter, though it is, for such a commodity, in exceptionally good
condition, I shall have to spend money enough to make me quite
concentrate my resources. The little old house you will at no distant
day, I hope, see for yourself and inhabit and even, I trust, temporarily
and gratuitously possess--for half the fun of it, in the coming years,
will be occasionally to lend it to you. I marked it for my own two years
ago at Rye--so perfectly did it, the first instant I beheld it, offer
the solution of my long-unassuaged desire for a calm retreat between May
and November. It is the very calmest and yet cheerfullest that I could
have dreamed--_in_ the little old, cobble-stoned, grass-grown,
red-roofed town, on the summit of its mildly pyramidal hill and close to
its noble old church--the chimes of which will sound sweet in my goodly
old red-walled garden.

The little place is so rural and tranquil, and yet discreetly animated,
that its being within the town is, for convenience and immediate
accessibility, purely to the good; and the house itself, though modest
and unelaborate, full of a charming little stamp and dignity of its
period (about 1705) without as well as within. The next time I go down
to see to its "doing up," I will try to have a photograph taken of the
pleasant little old-world town-angle into which its nice old red-bricked
front, its high old Georgian doorway and a most delightful little old
architectural garden-house, perched alongside of it on its high brick
garden-wall--into which all these pleasant features together so happily
"compose." Two years ago, after I had lost my heart to it--walking over
from Point Hill to make sheep's eyes at it (the more so that it is
called Lamb House!)--there was no appearance whatever that one could
ever have it; either that its fond proprietor would give it up or that
if he did it would come at all within one's means. So I simply sighed
and renounced; tried to think no more about it; till at last, out of the
blue, a note from the good local ironmonger, to whom I had whispered at
the time my hopeless passion, informed me that by the sudden death of
the owner and the preference (literal) of his son for Klondyke, it might
perhaps drop into my lap. Well, to make a long story short, it _did_
immediately drop and, more miraculous still to say, on terms, for a long
lease, well within one's means--terms quite deliciously moderate. The
result of these is, naturally, that they will "do" nothing to it: but,
on the other hand, it has been so well lived in and taken care of that
the doing--off one's own bat--is reduced mainly to sanitation and
furnishing--which latter includes the peeling off of old papers from
several roomfuls of pleasant old top-to-toe wood panelling. There are
two rooms of complete old oak--one of them a delightful little parlour,
opening by one side into the little vista, church-ward, of the small
old-world street, where not one of the half-dozen wheeled vehicles of
Rye ever passes; and on the other straight into the garden and the
approach, from that quarter, to the garden-house aforesaid, which is
simply the making of a most commodious and picturesque detached study
and workroom. Ten days ago Alfred Parsons, best of men as well as best
of landscape-painters-and-gardeners, went down with me and revealed to
me the most charming possibilities for the treatment of the tiny
out-of-door part--it amounts to about an acre of garden and lawn, all
shut in by the peaceful old red wall aforesaid, on which the most
flourishing old espaliers, apricots, pears, plums and figs, assiduously
grow. It appears that it's a glorious little growing exposure, air, and
soil--and all the things that were still flourishing out of doors
(November 20th) were a joy to behold. There went with me also a good
friend of mine, Edward Warren, a very distingué architect and loyal
spirit, who is taking charge of whatever is to be done. So I hope to get
in, comfortably enough, early in May. In the meantime one must "pick up"
a sufficient quantity of ancient mahogany-and-brass odds and ends--a
task really the more amusing, here, where the resources are great, for
having to be thriftily and cannily performed. The house is really quite
charming enough in its particular character, and as to the stamp of its
period, not to do violence to by rash modernities; and I am developing,
under its influence and its inspiration, the most avid and gluttonous
eye and most infernal watching patience, in respect of lurking
"occasions" in not too-delusive Chippendale and Sheraton. The "King's
Room" will be especially treated with a preoccupation of the comfort and
aesthetic sense of cherished sisters-in-law; King's Room so-called by
reason of George Second having passed a couple of nights there and so
stamped it for ever. (He was forced ashore, at Rye, on a progress
somewhere with some of his ships, by a tempest, and accommodated at Lamb
House as at the place in the town then most consonant with his grandeur.
It would, for that matter, quite correspond to this description still.
Likewise the Mayors of Rye have usually lived there! Or the persons
usually living there have usually _become_ mayors! That was
conspicuously the case with the late handsome old Mr. Bellingham, whose
son is my landlord. So you see the ineluctable dignity in store for me.)
But enough of this swagger. I have been copious to copiously amuse you.

Your beautiful letter, which I have just read over again, is full of
interest about you all; causing me special joy as to what it says of
William's present and prospective easier conditions of work,
relinquishment of laboratory, refusal of outside lectures, etc., and of
the general fine performance, and promise, all round, of the children.
What you say of each makes me want to see that particular one most.... I
had a very great pleasure the other day in a visit, far too short--only
six hours--from dear old Howells, who did me a lot of good in an
illuminating professional (i.e. commercial) way, and came, in fact, at
quite a psychological moment. I hope you may happen to see him soon
enough to get from him also some echo of _me_--such as it may be. But,
my dear Alice, I must be less interminable. Please tell William that I
have two Syracuse "advices," as yet gracelessly unacknowledged--I mean
to him--to thank him for. It's a joy to find these particular months
less barren than they used to be. I embrace you tenderly all round and
am yours very constantly,

HENRY JAMES.




_To Miss Grace Norton._


_Dictated._

34 De Vere Gardens, W.
Christmas Day, 1897.

My dear Grace,

Is it really a year? I have been acutely conscious of its getting to be
a horrible time, but it hadn't come home to me that it was taking on
quite that insolence. Well, you see what the years--since years _il y
a_--are making of me: I don't write to you for a hideous age, and then,
when at last I do, I take the romantic occasion of this particular day
to write in this _un_sympathetic ink. But that is exactly what, as I
say, the horrid time has made of me. The use of my hand, always
difficult, has become impossible to me; and since I am reduced to
dictation, this form of dictation is the best. May its distinctness make
up for its indirectness....

I dare say that, from time to time, you hear something of me from
William; and you know, by that flickering light, that my life has had,
for a long time past, a very jog-trot sort of rhythm. I have ceased
completely to "travel." It is going on into four years since I have
crossed the Channel; and the day is not yet. This will give you a
ghastly sense of the insular object that I must have become; however, I
shall break out yet, perhaps, and surprise you. Meanwhile, none the
less, I was unable, these last days, to break the spell of immobility
even to the extent of going over to Paris to poor Daudet's funeral. I
felt that, là-bas--by which I mean in the immediate house--a certain
expectation rested on me, but I looked it straight in the face and
cynically budged not. I dislike, more and more, the terrific organized
exploitation, in Paris, on the occasion of death and burial, of every
kind of personal privacy and every kind of personal hysterics. It is
newspaperism and professionalism gone mad--in a way all its own; and I
felt as if _I_ should go mad if I even once more, let alone twenty times
more, heard Daudet personally compared (more especially _facially_
compared, eyeglass and all) to Jesus Christ. Not a French notice of him
that I have seen but has plumped it coquettishly out. I had not seen
him, thanks to my extreme recalcitrance, since the month he spent more
than two years ago in London. His death was not unhappy--was indeed too
long delayed, for all his later time has been sadly (by disease, borne
with wonderful patience and subtlety) blighted and sterilized. Yet it is
a wonderful proof of what a success his life had been that it had
remained a success in spite of that. It was the most _worked_ thing that
ever was--I mean his whole career. His talent was so great that I feel,
as to his work, that the best of it will quite intensely remain. But he
was a queer combination of a great talent with an absence of the greater
mind, as it were--the greater feeling.

...Well, my dear Grace, I can't tell you the comfort and charm it is to
be talking with you even by this horrid machinery, and to squeeze the
little round golden orange of your note dry of every testimony to your
honoured tranquillity that I can gouge out of it. My metaphors are
mixed, but my fidelity is pure. How is the mighty Montaigne? I don't
read him a millionth part as much as I ought, for of all the horrors of
London almost the worst horror is the way it conspires against the
evening book under the evening lamp. I don't "go out"--and yet, far too
much of the time, I _am_ out. The main part of the rest I devote to
wondering how I got there. A propos of which, as much as anything, do
you read Maurice Barrès? If you do, his last thing, Les Déracinés, is
very curious and serious, but a gruesome picture of young France. If it
didn't sound British and Pharisaic I would almost risk saying that, on
all the more and more showing, young and old France both seem to me to
be in a strange state of moral and intellectual decomposition. But this
isn't worth saying without going into the detail of the evidence--and
that would take me too far. Then there is Leslie Stephen and the little
Kiplings. Leslie seems to be out-weathering his woes in the most
extraordinary way. His health is literally better than it was in his
wife's lifetime, and is perhaps, more almost than anything else, a proof
of what a life-preserver in even the wildest waves is the perfect
possession of a _métier_. His admirable habit and knowledge of work have
saved him.... Rudyard and his wife and offspring depart presently for
South Africa. They have settled upon a small propriété at Rottingdean
near the [Burne-Jones's], and the South Africa is but a parenthetic
family picnic. It would do as well as anything else, perhaps, if one
still felt, as one used to, that everything is grist to his mill. I
don't, however, think that everything is, as the affair is turning out,
at all; I mean as to the general complexity of life. His _Ballad_ future
may still be big. But my view of his prose future has much shrunken in
the light of one's increasingly observing how little of life he can make
use of. Almost nothing civilised save steam and patriotism--and the
latter only in verse, where I _hate_ it so, especially mixed up with
God and goodness, that that half spoils my enjoyment of his great
talent. Almost nothing of the complicated soul or of the female form or
of any question of _shades_--which latter constitute, to my sense, the
real formative literary discipline. In his earliest time I thought he
perhaps contained the seeds of an English Balzac; but I have quite given
that up in proportion as he has come steadily from the less simple in
subject to the more simple--from the Anglo-Indians to the natives, from
the natives to the Tommies, from the Tommies to the quadrupeds, from the
quadrupeds to the fish, and from the fish to the engines and screws....

Goodbye, my dear Grace. Believe that through all fallacious appearances
of ebb and flow, of sound and silence, of presence and absence, I am
always constantly yours,

HENRY JAMES.