RYE (1898-1903).


_To W. D. Howells._


34 De Vere Gardens, W.
January 28th, 1898.

My dear Howells,

Too long, too long have I delayed to thank you for your last good
letter; yet if I've been thus guilty the fault--as it were! the deep
responsibility--is largely your own. It all comes from that wonderful
(and still-in-my-ears reverberating) little talk we had that morning
here in the soft lap, and under the motherly apron, of the dear old
muffling fog--which will have kept every one else from hearing
_ever_--and only let me hear, and have been heard! I mean that the
effect of your admirable counsel and comfort was from that moment to
give me the sense of being, somehow, suddenly, preposterously,
renewingly and refreshingly, at a kind of practical high pressure which
has--well, which has simply, my dear Howells, made all the difference!
There it is. It is the absurd, dizzy consciousness of this difference
that has constituted (failing other things!) an exciting, absorbing
feeling of occupation and preoccupation--and thereby paralysed the mere
personal activity of my pen....

I hope you have by this time roared--and not _wholly_ with rage and
despair!--through the tunnel of your dark consciousness of return. I
dare say you are now quite out on the flowery meads of almost doubting
of having been away. This makes me fear your promise to come back--right
soon--next summer--may even now have developed an element of base
alloy. I rushed off to see Mrs. Harland the instant I heard _she_ was
back, and got hold of you--and of Mildred--for five minutes (and of all
the handsomest parts of both of you) in her talk. She had left a dying
mother, however, and her general situation has, I fear, its pressure and
pinch. What an interest indeed your boy's outlook must be to you! But,
as you say--seeing them _commence_--! Well, they never commenced before;
and the pain is all in _us_--not out of us. The thing is to keep it in.
But this scrawl--or sprawl--is about all my poor hand can now
sustainedly perpetrate; if I continue I shall have to clamour for a
mount--a lift--my brave boy of the alphabetic hoofs. But I spare you
those caracoles. I greet you each again, affectionately, and am yours,
my dear Howells, intensely,

HENRY JAMES.




_To Arthur Christopher Benson._

     The origin of _The Turn of the Screw_ in an anecdote told him by
     Archbishop Benson is described in the preface that H. J. wrote for
     it when it appeared in the collected edition of his works.


34 De Vere Gardens, W.
March 11th, 1898.

My dear Arthur,

I suppose that in the mysterious scheme of providence and fate such an
inspiration as your charming note--out of the blue!--of a couple of days
ago, is intended somehow to make up to me for the terror with which my
earlier--in fact _all_ my past--productions inspire me, and for the
insurmountable aversion I feel to looking at them again or to
considering them in any way. This morbid state of mind is really a
blessing in disguise--for it has for happy consequences that such an
incident as your letter becomes thereby extravagantly pleasant and gives
me a genial glow. All thanks and benedictions--I shake your hand very
hard--or _would_ do so if I could attribute to you anything so palpable,
personal and actual _as_ a hand. Yet I shall never write a sequel to the
_P. of an L._--admire my euphonic indefinite article. It's all too faint
and far away--too ghostly and ghastly--and I have bloodier things _en
tête_. I can do better than that!

But à propos, precisely, of the ghostly and ghastly, I have a little
confession to make to you that has been on my conscience these three
months and that I hope will excite in your generous breast nothing but
tender memories and friendly sympathies.

On one of those two memorable--never to be obliterated--winter nights
that I spent at the sweet Addington, your father, in the drawing-room by
the fire, where we were talking a little, in the spirit of recreation,
of such things, repeated to me the few meagre elements of a small and
gruesome spectral story that had been told _him_ years before and that
he could only give the dimmest account of--partly because he had
forgotten details and partly--and much more--because there had _been_ no
details and no coherency in the tale as he received it, from a person
who also but half knew it. The vaguest essence only was there--some dead
servants and some children. This essence _struck_ me and I made a note
of it (of a most scrappy kind) on going home. There the note remained
till this autumn, when, struck with it afresh, I wrought it into a
fantastic fiction which, first intended to be of the briefest, finally
became a thing of some length and is now being "serialised" in an
American periodical. It will appear late in the spring (chez Heinemann)
in a volume with _one_ other story, and then I will send it to you. In
the meanwhile please think of the _doing_ of the thing on my part as
having sprung from that kind old evening at Addington--quite gruesomely
as my unbridled imagination caused me to see the inevitable development
of the subject. It was all worth mentioning to you. I am very busy and
very decently fit and very much yours, always, my dear Arthur,

HENRY JAMES.




_To William James._

     The following letter was written immediately before the outbreak of
     war between Spain and the United States.


_Dictated._

34 De Vere Gardens, W.
20 April, 1898.

My dear William,

There are all sorts of _intimes_ and confidential things I want to say
to you in acknowledgment of your so deeply interesting letter--of April
10th--received yesterday; but I must break the back of my response at
least with this mechanical energy; not having much of any other--by
which I mean simply too many odd moments--at my disposal just now. I do
answer you, alas, almost to the foul music of the cannon. It is this
morning precisely that one feels the fat to be at last fairly in the
fire. I confess that the blaze about to come leaves me woefully cold,
thrilling with no glorious thrill or holy blood-thirst whatever. I see
nothing but the madness, the passion, the hideous clumsiness of rage, of
mechanical reverberation; and I echo with all my heart your denouncement
of the foul criminality of the screeching newspapers. They have long
since become, for me, the danger that overtops all others. That became
clear to one, even here, two years ago, in the Venezuela time; when one
felt that with a week of simple, enforced silence everything could be
saved. If things _were_ then saved without it, it is simply that they
hadn't at that time got so bad as they are now in the U.S. My sympathy
with you all is intense--the whole horror must so mix itself with all
your consciousness. I am near enough to hate it, without being, as you
are, near enough in some degree, perhaps, to understand. I am leading at
present so quiet a life that I don't measure much the sentiment, the
general attitude around me. Much of it can't possibly help being
Spanish--and from the "European" standpoint in general Spain _must_
appear savagely assaulted. She is so quiet--publicly and politically--so
decent and picturesque and harmless a member of the European family that
I am bound to say it argues an extraordinary illumination and a very
predetermined radicalism not to admire her pluck and pride. But
publicly, of course, England will do nothing whatever that is not more
or less--negatively--for our benefit. I scarcely know what the
newspapers say--beyond the Times, which I look at all for Smalley's
cables: so systematic is my moral and intellectual need of ignoring
them. One must save one's life if one can. The next weeks will, however,
in this particular, probably not a little break me down. I must at least
read the Bombardment of Boston. May you but scantly suffer from it!...

I rejoice with intense rejoicing in everything you tell me of your own
situation, plans, arrangements, honours, prospects--into all of which I
enter with an intimacy of participation. Your election to the _Institut_
has, for me, a surpassing charm--I simply revel and, as it were, wallow
in it. Je m'y vautre. But oh, if it could only have come soon enough for
poor Alice to have known it--such a happy little nip as it would have
given her; or for the dear old susceptible Dad! But things come as they
can--and I am, in general, lost in the daily miracle of their coming at
all: I mean so many of them--few as that many may be: and I speak above
all for myself. I am lost, moreover, just now, in the wonder of what
effect on American affairs, of every kind, the shock of battle will
have. Luckily it's of my nature--though not of my pocket--always to be
prepared for the worst and to expect the least. Like you, with all my
heart, I have "finance on the brain." At least I try to have it--with a
woeful lack of natural talent for the same. It is none too soon. But one
arrives at dates, periods, corners of one's life: great changes, deep
operations are begotten. This has more portée than I can fully go into.
I shall certainly do my best to let my flat when I am ready to leave
town; the difficulty, this year, however, will be that the time for
"season" letting begins now, and that I can't depart for at least
another month. Things are not ready at Rye, and won't be till then, with
the limited local energy at work that I have very wisely contented
myself with turning on there. It has been the right and much the best
way in the long run, and for one's good little relations there; only the
run has been a little longer. The remnant of the season here may be
difficult to dispose of--to a sub-lessee; and my books--only a part of
which I can house at Rye--are a complication. However, I shall do what I
can this year; and for subsequent absences, so long as my present lease
of De Vere Gardens runs, I shall have the matter on a smooth, organised,
working basis. I mean to arrange myself always to let--being, as such
places go, distinctly lettable. And for my declining years I have
already put my name down for one of the invaluable south-looking,
Carlton-Gardens-sweeping bedrooms at the Reform Club, which are let by
the year and are of admirable and convenient (with all the other
resources of the place at one's elbow) _general_ habitability. The only
thing is they are so in demand that one has sometimes a long time to
await one's turn. On the other hand there are accidents--"occasions."
... I embrace you all--Alice longer than the rest--and am--with much
actuality of emotion, ever your

HENRY.




_To Miss Muir Mackenzie._

     Miss Muir Mackenzie, who was staying at Winchelsea, had reported on
     the progress of the preparations at Lamb House.


34 De Vere Gardens, W.
Thursday [May 19, 1898].

Dear Miss Muir Mackenzie,

Forgive the constant pressure which has delayed the expression of my
gratitude for your charming, vivid, pictorial report of--well, of
everything. It was most kind of you to paddle again over to Rye to
minister to my anxieties. You both assuage and encourage them--but with
the right thing for each. I am content enough with the bathroom--but
hopeless about the garden, which I don't know what to do with, and shall
never, _never_ know. I am _densely_ ignorant--only just barely know
dahlias from mignonette--and shall never be able to work it in any way.
So I shan't try--but remain gardenless--only go in for a lawn; which
requires mere brute force--no intellect! For the rest I shall do
decently, perhaps--so far as one can do for two-and-ninepence. I shall
have nothing really "good"--only the humblest old fifth-hand, 50th hand,
mahogany and brass. I have collected a handful of feeble relics--but I
fear the small desert will too cruelly interspace them. Well,
_speriamo_. I'm very sorry to say that getting down before Saturday has
proved only the fondest of many delusions. The whole place has to be
mattinged before the rickety mahogany can go in, and the end of
that--or, for aught I know, the beginning--is not yet. I have but just
received the "estimate" for the (humblest) window-curtains (two tiers,
_on_ the windows, instead of blinds: white for downstairs etc.,
greeny-blue for _up_, if you like details,) and the "figure" leaves me
prostrate. Oh, what a tangled web we weave!--Still, I hope _you_, dear
lady, have a nice tangled one of some sort to occupy you such a day as
this. I think of you, on the high style of your castled steep, with
tender compassion. I scarce flatter myself you will in the hereafter
again haunt the neighbourhood; but if you ever do, I gloat over the idea
of making up for the shame of your having gone forth tea-less and
toast-less from any door of mine. I wish that, within it--my door--we
might discuss still weightier things. Of an ordinary--a normal--year, I
hope always to be there in May.

Deeply interesting your Winchelsea touches--especially so the portrait
of my future colleague--confrère--the Mayor--for the inhabitants of Lamb
House have always been Mayors of Rye. When I reach this dignity I will
appoint you my own Sketcher-in-Chief and replace for you by Château
Ypres (the old Rye stronghold) the limitations of Château Noakes. I
express to you fresh gratitude and sympathy, and am yours, dear Miss
Muir Mackenzie, most cordially,

HENRY JAMES.




_To Gaillard T. Lapsley._


_Dictated._

34 De Vere Gardens, W.
17th June, 1898.

My dear G. T. L.

I am very unhappy and humiliated at not having succeeded in again
putting my hand on you, and the fear that you may possibly have departed
altogether is a fearful aggravation of my misery. Therefore I am verily
stricken--so stricken as to be incapable of holding a pen and to be
reduced to this ugly--by which I mean this thoroughly
beautiful--substitute. If I wait for a pen, God knows when or where I
shall overtake you. Accordingly, in my effort to catch up, I let
Remington shamelessly loose. I lash his sides--I damn his eyes. Be found
by him, my dear man, somehow or somewhere--before the burden of my shame
crushes me to the earth and I sink beneath it into a frequently desired
grave. The worst of it all is that I saw E. Fawcett yesterday and he
told me he really believed you _had_ gone. I hammer away, but I don't in
the least know where to send this. Fawcett gave me a sort of a tip--at
which I think I shall clutch. A day or two after I last saw you I went
out of town till the following Monday, and then, coming back, had but
the Tuesday here, crammed with a frenzy and fury of conflicting duties.
On Wednesday I was obliged to dash away again--to go down to Rye, where
domestic complications of the gravest order held me fast the rest of the
week, or at least till the Saturday, when I rushed up to town only in
time to rush off again and spend, at Cobham, two days with the Godkins,
to whose ensconcement there it had been, for a long time before, one of
the features of a devouring activity that I had responsibly helped to
contribute. But now that I am at home again till, as soon as possible,
I succeed in breaking away for the rest of the summer, I have lost you
beyond recall, and my affliction is deep and true. But we know what it
is better to have done even as an accompaniment of losing than never to
have done at all. And I didn't do nothing at all--on the contrary, I did
_that_: that which is better. This is but a flurried and feverish
word--hurried off in the hope of keeping your inevitable hating me from
becoming a settled habit. I follow you with much sympathy, and with
still more interest, attention and hope. I follow you, in short, with a
great many sentiments. May the great globe whirl round before long some
such holiday for you as will convert--for _me_--the pursuit I so
inadequately allude to into something in the nature of an encounter.
Only write to me. Do write to me. I mean when you begin to see your way.
I know you will have lots to do first--and I am very patient, as befits
one who is so constantly yours,

HENRY JAMES.




_To Paul Bourget._


_Dictated._

Lamb House, Rye.
19th August, 1898.

Mon cher Ami,

I have hideously delayed to acknowledge your so interesting letter from
Paris, and now the manner of my response does little to repair the
missing grace of my silence. I trust, however, to your general
confidence not to exact of me the detail of the reasons why I am more
and more _asservi_ to this benevolent legibility, which I so delight in
on the part of others that I find it difficult to understand their
occasional resentment of the same on my own--a resentment that I know
indeed, from generous licence already given, you do not share. I have
promised myself each day to attack you pen in hand, but the overpowering
heat which, I grieve to say, has reigned even on my balmy hilltop, has,
by really sickening me, taken the colour out of all my Gallo-latin,
leaving very blanched as well the paler idiom in which I at last
perforce address you.

I have been entering much more than my silly silence represents into the
sequel of your return to London, and not less into the sequel of _that_.
Please believe in my affectionate participation as regards the Bezly
Thorne consultation and whatever emotion it may have excited in either
of you. To that emotion I hope the healing waters have already applied
the most cooling, soothing, softening douche--or administered a not less
beneficent draught if the enjoyment of them has had in fact to be more
inward. I congratulate you on the decision you so speedily took and,
with your usual Napoleonic celerity when the surface of the globe is in
question, so energetically acted upon. I trust you are, in short, really
settled for a while among rustling German woods and plashing German
waters. (Those are really, for the most part, my own main impressions of
Germany--the memory of ancient summers there at more or less bosky
Bäder, or other Kur-orten, involving a great deal of open air strolling
in the shade and sitting under trees.) This particular dose of
Deutschland will, I feel, really have been more favourable to you than
your having had to swallow the Teuton-element in the form of the
cookery, or of any other of the manifold attributes, of the robust
fausse anglaise whom I here so confoundingly revealed to you. Let it
console you also a little that you would have had to bear, as well, with
that burden, a temperature that the particular conditions of the house
I showed you would not have done much to minimise. I have been grilled,
but I have borne it better for not feeling that I had put you also on
the stove. Rye goes on baking, this amazing summer, but, though I
suppose the heat is everywhere, you have a more refreshing regimen. I
pray for the happiest and most marked results from it.

I have received the _Duchesse Bleue_, and also the Land of Cockaigne
from Madame Paul, whom I thank very kindly for her inscription. I had
just read the Duchess, but haven't yet had leisure to attack the great
Matilda. The Duchess inspires me with lively admiration--so close and
firm, and with an interest so nourished straight from the core of the
subject, have you succeeded in keeping her. I never read you sans
vouloir me colleter with you on what I can't help feeling to be the
detrimental parti-pris (unless it be wholly involuntary) of some of your
narrative, and other technical, processes. These questions of art and
form, as well as of much else, interest me deeply--really much more than
any other; and so, not less, do they interest you: yet, though they
frequently come up between us, as it were, when I read you, I nowadays
never seem to see you long enough at once to thresh them comfortably out
with you. Moreover, after all, what does threshing-out avail?--that
conviction is doubtless at the bottom of my disposition, half the time,
to let discussion go. Each of us, from the moment we are worth our salt,
writes as he can and only as he can, and his writing at all is
conditioned upon the very things that from the standpoint of another
method most lend themselves to criticism. And we each know much better
than anyone else can what the defect of our inevitable form may appear.
So, though it does strike me that your excess of anticipatory analysis
undermines too often the reader's curiosity--which is a gross, loose
way of expressing one of the things I mean--so, probably, I really
understand better than anyone except yourself why, to do the thing at
all, you must use your own, and nobody's else, trick of presentation. No
two men in the world have the same idea, image and measure of
presentation. All the same, I must some day read one of your books with
you, so interesting would it be to me--if not to _you_!--to put, from
page to page and chapter to chapter, your finger on certain places,
showing you just where and why (selon moi!) you are too prophetic, too
exposedly constructive, too disposed yourself to swim in the thick
reflective element in which you set your figures afloat. All this is a
clumsy notation of what I mean, and, on the whole, mal àpropos into the
bargain, inasmuch as I find in the Duchess plenty of the art I most like
and the realisation of an admirable subject. Beautifully done the whole
episode of the actress's intervention in the rue Nouvelle, in which I
noted no end of superior touches. I doubt if any of your readers lose
less than I do--to the fiftieth part of an intention. All this part of
the book seems to me thoroughly handled--except that, I think, I should
have given Molan a different behaviour after he gets into the cab with
the girl--not have made him act so _immediately_ "in character." He
takes there no line--I mean no deeper one--which is what I think he
would have done. In fact I think I see, myself, positively what he would
have done; and in general he is, to my imagination, as you give him, too
much in character, too little mysterious. So is Mme. de Bonnivet--so
too, even, is the actress. Your love of intellectual daylight,
absolutely your pursuit of complexities, is an injury to the patches of
ambiguity and the abysses of shadow which really are the clothing--or
much of it--of the _effects_ that constitute the material of our trade.
Basta!

I ordered my year-old "Maisie" the other day to be sent to you, and I
trust she will by this time have safely arrived--in spite of some
ambiguity in the literation of the name of your villa as, with your
letter in my hand, I earnestly meditate upon it. I have also despatched
to Madame Paul myself a little volume just published--a poor little
pot-boiling study of nothing at all, qui ne tire pas à conséquence. It
is but a monument to my fatal technical passion, which prevents my ever
giving up anything I have begun. So that when something that I have
supposed to be a subject turns out on trial really to be none, je m'y
acharne d'autant plus, for mere superstition--superstitious fear, I
mean, of the consequences and omens of weakness. The small book in
question is really but an exercise in the art of not appearing to one's
self to fail. You will say it is rather cruel that for such exercises
the public also should have to pay. Well, Madame Paul and you get your
exemplaire for nothing.

I have not seen La Femme et le Pantin--I see nothing in the way of books
here; but what you tell me disposes me to send for it--as well as my
impression of the only other thing that I have read by the same hand.
Only, on the question of talent and of effect produced, don't you
forget, too much, with such people, that talent and effect are
comparatively easy things with the licence of such gros moyens? They are
a great short-cut--the extremities to which all these people proceed,
and anyone can--no matter who--be more or less striking with them. But I
am writing you an interminable letter. Do let me know--sans m'en vouloir
for the quantity and quality of it--how Nauheim turns out, and receive
my heartiest wishes for all sorts of comfortable results. Yours both
always constantly,

HENRY JAMES.




_To W. D. Howells._


_Dictated._

Lamb House, Rye.
19th August, 1898.

My dear Howells,

I throw myself without hesitation into this familiar convenience, for
the simple reason that I can thus thank you to-day for your blessed
letter from York Harbour, whereas if I were to wait to be merely
romantic and illegible, I should perhaps have, thanks to many things, to
put off _la douce affaire_ till week after next. If I strike, moreover,
while the iron is hot, I strike also while the weather is--so
unprecedentedly hot for this lukewarm land that even the very moderate
cerebral performance to which I am treating you requires [_sic_] no
manual extension. It has been delicious to hear from you, and, even
though I be here domiciled in some gentility, in a little old
quasi-historic wainscotted house, with a real lawn and a real
mulberry-tree of my own to kick my heels on and under, I draw from the
folds of your page a faint, far sense of the old and remembered breath
of New England woods and New England waters--such as there is still
somewhere on my jaded palate the power to taste and even a little,
over-built and over-planted as I at the best am, to languish for....

I can't speak to you of the war very much further than to admire the wit
of your closing epigram about it, which, however, at the rate you throw
out these things, you must long since have forgotten. But my silence
isn't in the least indifference; it is a deep embarrassment of
thought--of imagination. I have hated, I have almost loathed it; and yet
I can't help plucking some food for fancy out of its results--some
vision of how much the bigger complexity we are landed in, the bigger
world-contacts, may help to educate us and force us to produce people of
capacity greater than a less pressure demands. Capacity for _what_? you
will naturally ask--whereupon I scramble out of our colloquy by saying
that I should perhaps tell you beautifully if you were here and sitting
with me on the darkening lawn of my quaint old garden at the end of this
barely endurable August day. I will make more things than that clear to
you if you will only turn up there. Each of you, Mrs. Howells, Mildred,
and John all included--for I have four spare rooms, tell it not
anywhere--has been individually considered, as to what you would most
like, in my domestic arrangements. Good-bye, good-bye. It is getting so
dark that I can't see to dictate--which represents to you sufficiently
the skill of my secretary. I am deeply impatient for your novel. But I
fear a painful wait.... Yours, my dear Howells, evermore,

HENRY JAMES.




_To Madame Paul Bourget._

     _The Awkward Age_ began to appear in _Harper's Weekly_ on October
     1, 1898. Madame Bourget had sent H. J. her translation into French
     of Mathilde Serao's _Paese di Cuccagna_.


Lamb House, Rye.
August 22nd, 1898.

Dear Madame Paul,

I rejoice in your charming letter and find it most kind. I wrote to
Bourget four or five days ago, so that you are not without my news
(unless my misconstruction of the name of your villa has deprived you,)
and meanwhile it is an immense satisfaction to have something of the
detail of yours. It rather sounds, indeed, as if it were summed up in
the one word (con rispetto parlando) perspiration--but I doubt if the
difference between Rye and Nauheim has been other than that of the
frying-pan and the fire. Here we have very sufficiently fried, and I
have been moved to see the finger of Providence in the large, fat, dirty
_index_ of the bouncing dame who, to your vision, pointed away from
Watchbell St. I have said to myself on the torrid afternoons: "Les
malheureux--boxed up with that staircase in that stuffiness--comment y
eussent-ils survécu!" Such reflections are what has principally happened
to me--except, thank heaven, to get on more or less with my novel, the
serial publication of which begins, in New York, on October 1st. I hope
with all my heart that, in spite of everything, you feel your cure to be
deep-based and wide-striking.... I am distressed that "Maisie" hasn't
yet reached you, and will immediately write to London to see how my
publishers have _envisagé_ the address I sent them. But I trust she may
perhaps be in the act of arriving--now. It is a volume the merit of
which is that the subject--and there is a subject--is, I think,
exhaustively treated--over-treated, I dare say. But I feel it--suppose
it--to be probably what I have done, in the way of meeting the artistic
problem, of best. The elements, however, are none of the largest. Let me
thank you more directly for the solid _cadeau_ of your so accomplished
translation. I am only waiting for the first cool day to begin it: I
shrink a little, otherwise, under the dog-star, from Naples and the
ardent Matilda. But you will neither of you lose by it.... My
affectionate greeting to Bourget. Believe me, dear Madame Paul, yours
very constantly,

HENRY JAMES.




_To Miss Frances R. Morse._


_Dictated._

Lamb House, Rye.
October 19th, 1898.

My dear Fanny,

I have received, month after month, the most touching and admirable
signs of your remembrance, and yet haven't--visibly to yourself--so much
as waved a hat at you in return: a brutality which, however, is all on
the surface only and no measure of the deep appreciation I have really
felt. Your letters, from the moment the war began, were a real waft of
the real thing, penetrating all the more deeply on account of all the
old memories stirred by the particular things, the names and persons and
kind of anxiety, they were full of--so many echoes of the far-away time
it makes one, in the presence of the _un_-knowing generation, feel so
horribly old to recall. I can thank you, affectionately, for all these
things now very much better than I can explain in detail why you have
not heard from me sooner. The best explanation is simply the general
truth that I've had a summer in which my correspondence has very much
gone to the wall. I moved down here rather early, but that operated not
quite--or really not at all--as a simplification. You know for yourself
what it means to start a new home, on however humble a basis--from the
moment one has to do it mainly single-handed and with a great deal else
to do at the same tune. Here I am at last on somewhat quieter
days--though even this does happen to be a week of such small
hospitalities as I am restricted to, and I have, if only from the still
large arrears of my correspondence, which reduce me to this ugly
process, the sense of the shining hour at best unimproved.

I won't attempt to take up in detail your innumerable bits of news and
all your evocations of the Boston picture. I move through _that_,
always, as through a company of ghosts, so completely have sound and
sight of individuals and presences faded away from me. Still, I _have_
had some close reminders. Wendell Holmes was here, still beautiful and
charming, for a day or two, and above all, off and on, for a couple of
months my nephew Harry, whom you well know, and in whom I took no end of
comfort and pleasure. His being here was a great satisfaction to me--and
doubled by the fact of my so getting more news of William and Alice than
I have had for many a year. She sent to the boy all his father's letters
from California and elsewhere--the consequence of which, for me, was a
wonderful participation and interest. William appears to have had a
magnificent sort of summer and no end of success on the Pacific
slope--besides innumerable impressions by the way and an excellent
series of weeks in the Adirondacks before going forth. But after all,
all these things have flashed by. The very war, now that it's over,
seems merely to have flashed--the dreadful marks of the flash, in so
many a case, being beyond my ken. Well, I won't attempt to go into
it--it's all beyond me. It only, I'm afraid, makes me want to curl up
more closely in this little old-world corner, where I can successfully
beg such questions. They become a spectacle merely--a drama of great
interest, but as to which judgment and prophecy are withered in me, or
at all events absolutely checked.

I am very sorry you and your mother have ceased coming out just at the
time I've something to show you. My little old house is really pretty
enough for that, and has given me, all this wonderful, hot, rainless,
radiant summer, a peace that would pass understanding if I had only got
through the first botherations a little earlier in the season. However,
I've done very well--have only not been quite such an anchorite as I had
planned. The bump of luggage has been frequent on my stair, and the
conference with the cook proved a greater strain than, in that
particular way, I have ever before had to meet. But it's doubtless my
own fault. I should have sought a drearier refuge. I am staying here
late--as far on into the autumn as wind and weather may permit. I hope
this will find you in the very heart of the American October crystal....
I congratulate you, my dear Fanny, on all the warm personal, local life
that surrounds you, and that you touch at so many points very much more
the normal state for one's afternoon of existence, after all, than my
expatriated one. But we go on as we may. I don't feel as if I had
thanked you half enough for your so many beautiful bulletins--and can
only ask you to believe that each, in its order, more or less brought
tears to my eyes. Recall me, please, to your mother's kindest
remembrance, and believe me

Yours evermore,
HENRY JAMES.




_To Dr. Louis Waldstein._


Lamb House, Rye.
Oct. 21st, 1898.

Dear Sir,

Forgive my neglect, under great pressure of occupation, of your so
interesting letter of the 12th. I have since receiving it had
complicated calls on my time. That the _Turn of the Screw_ has been
suggestive and significant to you--in any degree--it gives me great
pleasure to hear; and I can only thank you very kindly for the impulse
of sympathy that made you write. I am only afraid, perhaps, that my
conscious intention strikes you as having been larger than I deserve it
should be thought. It is the intention so primarily, with me, always, of
the artist, the _painter_, that _that_ is what I most, myself, feel in
it--and the lesson, the idea--ever--conveyed is only the one that deeply
lurks in any vision prompted by life. And as regards a presentation of
things so fantastic as in that wanton little Tale, I can only rather
blush to see real substance read into them--I mean for the generosity of
the reader. _But_, of course, where there _is_ life, there's truth, and
the truth was at the back of my head. The poet is always justified when
he is not a humbug; always grateful to the justifying commentator. My
bogey-tale dealt with things so hideous that I felt that to save it at
all it needed some infusion of beauty or prettiness, and the beauty of
the pathetic was the only attainable--was indeed inevitable. But ah, the
exposure indeed, the helpless plasticity of childhood that isn't dear or
sacred to _some_body! That _was_ my little tragedy--over which you show
a wisdom for which I thank you again. Believe me, thus, my dear Sir,
yours most truly,

HENRY JAMES.




_To H. G. Wells._

     The reference in the second paragraph of this letter is to
     _Covering End_, the second story of _The Two Magics_. Mr. Wells was
     at this time living near Folkestone, distant from Rye by the
     breadth of Romney Marsh.


Lamb House, Rye.
Dec. 9th, 1898.

My dear H. G. Wells,

Your so liberal and graceful letter is to my head like coals of fire--so
repeatedly for all these weeks have I had feebly to suffer frustrations
in the matter of trundling over the marsh to ask for your news and wish
for your continued amendment. The shortening days and the deepening mud
have been at the bottom of this affair. I never get out of the house
till 3 o'clock, when night is quickly at one's heels. I would have taken
a regular day--I mean started in the a.m.--but have been so ridden,
myself, by the black care of an unfinished and _running_ (galloping,
leaping and bounding,) serial that parting with a day has been like
parting with a pound of flesh. I am still a neck ahead, however, and
_this_ week will see me through; I accordingly hope very much to be able
to turn up on one of the ensuing days. I will sound a horn, so that you
yourself be not absent on the chase. Then I will express more
articulately my appreciation of your various signs of critical interest,
as well as assure you of my sympathy in your own martyrdom. What will
you have? It's all a grind and a bloody battle--as well as a
considerable lark, and the difficulty itself is the refuge from the
vulgarity. Bless your heart, I think I could easily say worse of the T.
of the S., the young woman, the spooks, the style, the everything, than
the worst any one else could manage. One knows the most damning things
about one's self. Of course I had, about my young woman, to take a very
sharp line. The grotesque business I had to make her picture and the
childish psychology I had to make her trace and present, were, for me at
least, a very difficult job, in which absolute lucidity and logic, a
singleness of effect, were imperative. Therefore I had to rule out
subjective complications of her own--play of tone etc.; and keep her
impersonal save for the most obvious and indispensable little note of
neatness, firmness and courage--without which she wouldn't have had her
data. But the thing is essentially a pot-boiler and a _jeu d'esprit_.

With the little play, the absolute creature of its conditions, I had
simply to make up a deficit and take a small _revanche_. For three
mortal years had the actress for whom it was written (utterly to try to
_fit_) persistently failed to produce it, and I couldn't wholly waste my
labour. The B.P. won't read a play with the mere names of the
speakers--so I simply paraphrased these and added such indications as
might be the equivalent of decent acting--a history and an evolution
that seem to me moreover explicatively and sufficiently smeared all over
the thing. The moral is of course: Don't write one-act plays. But I
didn't mean thus to sprawl. I envy your hand your needle-pointed
fingers. As you don't say that you're _not_ better I prepare myself to
be greatly struck with the same, and with kind regards to your wife,

Believe me yours ever,
HENRY JAMES.

P.S. What's this about something in some newspaper?--I read least of
all--from long and deep experience--what my friends write about me, and
haven't read the things you mention. I suppose it's because they know I
don't that they dare!




_To F. W. H. Myers._


Lamb House, Rye.
Dec. 19, 1898.

My dear Myers,

I don't know what you will think of my unconscionable delay to
acknowledge your letter of so many, so very many days ago, nor exactly
how I can make vivid to you the nature of my hindrances and excuses. I
have, in truth, been (until some few days since) intensely and anxiously
busy, finishing, under pressure, a long job that had from almost the
first--I mean from long before I had reached the end--begun to be
(loathsome name and fact!) "serialized"--so that the printers were at my
heels and I had to make a sacrifice of my correspondence _utterly_--to
keep the sort of cerebral freshness required for not losing my head or
otherwise collapsing. But I won't expatiate. Please believe my silence
has been wholly involuntary. And yet, now that I _am_ writing I scarce
know what to say to you on the subject on which you wrote, especially as
I'm afraid I don't quite _understand_ the principal question you put to
me about "The Turn of the Screw." However, that scantily matters; for in
truth I am afraid I have on some former occasions rather awkwardly
signified to you that I somehow can't pretend to give any coherent
account of my small inventions "after the fact." There they are--the
fruit, at best, of a very imperfect ingenuity and with all the
imperfections thereof on their heads. The one thing and another that are
questionable and ambiguous in them I mostly take to be conditions of
their having got themselves pushed through at all. The _T. of the S._ is
a very mechanical matter, I honestly think--an inferior, a merely
_pictorial_, subject and rather a shameless pot-boiler. The thing that,
as I recall it, I most wanted not to fail of doing, under penalty of
extreme platitude, was to give the impression of the communication to
the children of the most infernal imaginable evil and danger--the
condition, on their part, of being as _exposed_ as we can humanly
conceive children to be. This was my artistic knot to untie, to put any
sense or logic into the thing, and if I had known any way of producing
_more_ the image of their contact and condition I should assuredly have
been proportionately eager to resort to it. I evoked the worst I could,
and only feel tempted to say, as in French: "Excusez du peu!"

I am living so much down here that I fear I am losing hold of some of my
few chances of occasionally seeing you. The charming old humble-minded
"quaintness" and quietness of this little brown hilltop city lays a
spell upon me. I send you and your wife and all your house all the
greetings of the season and am, my dear Myers, yours very constantly,

HENRY JAMES.




_To Mrs. William James._


_Dictated._

Lamb House, Rye.
19th December, 1898.

Dearest Alice,

I have gone on and on most abominably and inexorably owing you a letter
since a date so distant that I associate the time intimately with the
admirable summer, here, that we so long ago left behind and of which
Harry will--at a period by this time quite prehistoric--have given you
something of the pleasant little story. But the sense always abides with
me that when I am for weeks and months together dumb--as I know I more
than once _have_ been--you and William are quite _de force_ to read into
it all the kindly extenuations I require. I have in fact, for many
weeks, down here, been taking the general line of saving up all the
cerebration not imperatively drained off from day to day for a long job
that I have had to carry through under the nightmare of belatedness--a
belatedness so great (produced by time lost originally in arranging this
place, moving down, taking possession, etc.) as to leave me no margin
whatever for accident, indisposition or languor. My capacity for the
distillation of prose of decent quality remains, alas, with all the
amendments time has brought it, still, each day, so limited that I get
awfully nervous under a very continuous task unless I by certain
flagrant sacrifices keep up to myself the fiction of freshness--of not
getting simply _sick_, in other words, by adding any writing that I
haven't absolutely to do to the quantity that _is_ each morning imposed.
So the sacrifices, for a long time past, have been, as usual, my
correspondence, and as the most tender morsels for the Moloch you and
William naturally _en première ligne_. The Moloch at last,
however--since these four or five days, has been temporarily appeased;
and I have instantly begun to transfer my attention from one form of
belatement to another. I am working off arrears of letters, and if I
take you, dearest Alice, in the heap, I at least pay you the sweet
tribute of taking you _first_. You have been without sign or sound of me
so long that I daresay you may have even wild imaginings about my
"location" and other conditions. I am located only just where Harry left
me and where I have stuck fast since July last without the excision of
twenty-four hours. The autumn and the early winter have followed the
ardent summer here only to multiply my points of contact with my
environment and to saturate me more deeply with the grateful sense of
it. This contentment has defied all winds and weathers--in plenty of
which we have for the last two months rejoiced. I like to send all our
little news of such matters in the form of news to Harry in particular,
whose mind is furnished with the proper little hooks for it to hold on
by. Tell him then, since I won't attempt to burden him individually with
acknowledgements that will overload him, that everything he fancied and
fondled here only kept growing, all the autumn long, more adapted to
such a relation, and that in short both the little brown city and the so
amiable countryside were not in July and August a "patch," for charm,
colour, "subtlety" and every kind of daily grace, to what they became,
in an uninterrupted crescendo, all through October and November. All the
good that I hoped of the place has, in fine, profusely bloomed and
flourished here. It was really at about the end of September, when the
various summer supernumeraries had quite faded away, that the special
note of Rye, the feeling of the little hilltop community, bound together
like a very modest, obscure and impecunious, but virtuous and amiable
family, began most unmistakably to come out. This is the present note of
life here, and it has floated me (excuse mixture of metaphor) very
placidly along. Nothing would induce me now _not_ to be here for
Christmas and nothing will induce me not to do my best at least to be
here for the protrusion of the bulbs--the hyacinths and tulips and
crocuses--that, in return for expended shillings, George Gammon promises
me for the earliest peep of spring. As he has broken no word with me
yet, I trust him implicitly for this. Meantime too I have trusted him,
all the autumn, for all sorts of other things as well: we have committed
to the earth together innumerable unsightly roots and sprigs that I am
instructed to depend upon as the fixed foundation of a future
herbaceous and perennial paradise. Little by little, even with other
cares, the slowly but surely working poison of the garden-mania begins
to stir in my long-sluggish veins. Tell Harry, as an intimate instance,
that by a masterly inspiration I have at one bold stroke swept away all
the complications in the quarter on which the studio looks down,
uprooting the wilderness of shrubs, relaying paths, extending borders,
etc., and made arrangements to throw the lawn, in one lordly sweep,
straight up into that angle--a proceeding that greatly increases our
apparent extent and dignity: an improvement, in short, quite
unspeakable. But the great charm is the simply _being_ here, and in
particular the beginning of the day no longer with the London blackness
and foulness, the curtain of fog and smoke that one has each morning
muscularly to lift and fasten back; but with the pleasant, sunny garden
outlook, the grass all haunted with starlings and chaffinches, and the
in-and-out relation with it that in a manner gilds and refreshes the
day. This indeed--with work and a few, a very few, people--is the _all_.
But that is just the beauty. I've missed nothing that I haven't been
more than resigned to. There have been a few individuals from Saturday
to Monday, and one--Jonathan Sturges, whose identity, if it is too dim
for you, it would take me too long to explain--ever since mid-October.
He remains till over Christmas; but save as making against pure
intensity of concentration, he is altogether a boon. I go to town the
last of the month, but only for two or three weeks and in a pure
picnicking way. I have a plan and a desire really to achieve this winter
after an intermission of five years, ten or twelve weeks in Italy; and
it now seems probable I shall do so. I shall not know with absolute
definiteness till I go to London; but the omens and portents are
favourable. On my return I shall come straight down here, and I already
foresee how the thought of the spring here will draw me from almost
wherever I may at that time be. I shall write you again, however, about
this; so that you shall definitely know what becomes of me. You see this
is a pure outpouring of the ego. I am after all without fresh news of
yourselves to rebound from. The latest and best is William's kind
dispatch to me of his "Immortality" lecture, for which I heartily thank
him, and which I have read with great appreciation of the art and
interest of it. I am afraid I don't very consciously come in to either
of the classes it is designed to pacify--either that of the yearners, I
mean, or that of the objectors. It isn't the difficulties that keep me
from the yearning--it is somehow the lack of the principle of the same.
However, I go not now into this. I only acknowledge, till after the turn
of the year I write to him, William's communication of the book. Every
illustration of his magnificent activity--at the spectacle of which I am
condemned to such a woefully back seat--gives me more joy than I will
now pretend to express. For the rest, dearest Alice, take from me all my
"hopes"; the inevitable vain ones about your household health and
happiness and the complexion and outlook of the season for all of you. I
try to see you all as cheerfully and gregariously--yet not, for the
dignity of each, too much of the latter--fire-lighted and eke
furnace-heated. Strange things contend with this image--wild newspaper
blizzards and other public bewilderments. Are you individually
expanding?--I mean even to the islands of the sea. I myself have no
policy. I have no judgment. I am too far and too unadvised and too out
of it and too "subtle," also, to see gospel truth in all the so genial
encouragement that our swelling state finds, naturally and very
logically, in this country. That the two countries should swell together
offers material convenience--and that is for much. But I only meant to
ask if William and you and the children are definitely in or out of the
swell. I will be myself wherever you are.... Yours dearest Alice, always
constantly,

HENRY JAMES.




_To Charles Eliot Norton._


_Dictated._

Lamb House, Rye.
26th December, 1898.

My dear Charles,

...Let me say at once that a great part of the secret of my horrid
prolonged dumbness has been just this ugly fact of my finding myself
reduced, in my declining years, like a banker or a cabinet minister,
altogether to _dictating_ my letters. The effect of this, in turn, has
been to give me a great shyness about them--which has indeed stricken me
with silence just in proportion as the help so rendered has seemed to
myself really to minister to speech. Many people, I find, in these
conservative climes, take it extremely ill to be addressed in
Remingtonese.... Forgive, however, this long descant on my delays, my
doubts and fears, my final jump, rendered thus clumsy by my
nervousness....

The worst of such predicaments is, my dear Charles, that when one does
write, everything one has, at a thousand scattered moments, previously
wanted to say, seems to have dried up with desuetude and neglect. Oh,
all the things that should have been said on the spot if they were ever
to be said at all! This applies, you will immediately recognise--though
it's a stern truth by which I suffer most--very poignantly to all the
utterance I feel myself to have so odiously failed of at the time of
the death of dear Burne-Jones. I can only give you a very partially
lucid account of why on _that_ occasion at least no word from me reached
you. I saw myself, heard myself, felt myself, not write--and yet even
then knew perfectly both that I should be writing now and that I should
now be sorrier than ever for not writing then. It came, the miserable
event, at the very moment I was achieving, very single-handed and
unassisted, a complicated transfer of residence from London to this
place, with all sorts of bewildering material detail (consequent on
renovation, complete preparation of every kind, of old house and garden)
adding its distraction to the acute sense of pressing work fatally
retarded and blighted; so that a postponement which has finally grown to
this monstrous length began with being a thing only of moments and
hours. Then, moreover, it was simply so wretched and odious to feel him,
by a turn of the wheel of fate that had taken but an instant, gone for
ever from sight and sound and touch. I was tenderly attached to him,
with abundant reason for being, and there was something that choked and
angered me beyond what words could trust themselves to express, in the
mere blind bêtise of the business. So the days and the weeks went. I
went up from here to town, and thence to Rottingdean, for the committal
of his ashes, there, to the earth of the little grey-towered churchyard,
in sight of the sea, that was at the moment all smothered in lovely
spring flowers. It was a day of extraordinary beauty, and in every way a
quite indescribably sincere--I remember I could find at the time no
other word for the impression--little funeral and demonstration. The
people from London were those, almost all, in whose presence there was a
kind of harmony.... I had seen the dear man, to my great joy, only a few
hours before his death: meeting him at a kind of blighted and abortive
wedding-feast (that is a dinner before a marriage that was to take
place on the morrow) from which we were both glad to disembroil
ourselves: so that we drove together home, intimately moralising and
talking nonsense, and he put me, in the grey London midnight, down at my
corner to go on by himself to the Grange. It was the last time I saw
him, and, as one always does, I have taken ever since a pale comfort in
the thought that our parting was explicitly affectionate and such,
almost, as one would have wished it even had one known. I miss him even
here and now. He was one of the most loveable of men and most charming
of friends--altogether and absolutely distinguished. I think his career,
as an artistic one, and speaking quite apart from the degree of one's
sympathy with his work, one of the greatest of boons to our most vulgar
of ages. There was no false note in him, nothing to dilute the strain;
he knew his direction and held it hard--wrought with passion and went as
straight as he could. He was for all this always, to me, a great
comfort. For the rest death came to him, I think, at none so bad a
moment. He had, essentially, to my vision, really _done_. And he was
very tired, and his cup was, with all the mingled things, about as full
as it would hold. It was so good a moment, in short, that I think his
memory is already feeling the benefit of it in a sort of rounded
finished way. I was not at the sale of his pictures and drawings which
took place after his death--I have not stirred from this spot since I
came to it at the end of June; but though I should immensely have
cherished some small scrap, everything went at prices--magnificent for
his estate--that made acquisition a vain dream.... I have had--and
little wonder--scant news of you. I know you've renounced your
professorship. I know you felt strongly on public events. But I am in a
depressed twilight--of discrimination, I mean--that enables me to make
less of these things than I should like to do. So much has come and
gone, these six months, that how can I talk about it? It's strange, the
consciousness possible to an American here to-day, of being in a country
in which the drift of desire--so far as it concerns itself with the
matter--is that we _shall_ swell and swell, and acquire and _re_quire,
to the top of our opportunity. My own feeling, roughly stated, is that
we have not been good enough for our opportunity--vulgar, in a manner,
as that was and is; but it may be the real message of the whole business
to make us as much better as the great grabbed-up British Empire has,
unmistakeably, made the English. But over these abysses--into them
rather--I peer with averted eye. I fear I am too lost in the mere
spectacle for any decent morality. Good-bye, my dear Charles, and
forgive my mechanic volubility. Isn't it better to have ticked and
shocked than never to have ticked at all? I send my love to all your
house....

Your ever, my dear Charles, affectionate old friend,

HENRY JAMES.




_To Henry James, junior._


Lamb House, Rye.
Feb. 24, 1899.

Dearest Harry,

I have a good letter from you too long unanswered--but you will easily
condone my offence of not too soon loading you with the burdensome sense
that it is I--not your virtuous self--who have last written. And you
must now let that sense sit on you very lightly. Don't trouble about me
till all college pressure is completely over--by which I mean till some
as yet comparatively remote summer-day.... We've had of late a good lot
of wondrous, sunny, balmy days--to-day is splendid--in which I have
kept saying to myself "What a climate--dear old much-abused thing--after
all!" and feeling quite balmily and baskingly southern. I've been
"sitting" all the last month in the green upstairs south-west room,
whose manifest destiny is clearly to become a second-story boudoir.
Whenever my books arrive in their plenitude from De Vere Gardens it will
be absolutely required to help to house them. It has been, at any rate,
constantly flooded with sun, and has opened out its view toward
Winchelsea and down the valley in the most charming way. The garden is
beginning to smile and shimmer almost as if it were already May. Half
the crocuses and hyacinths are up, the primrose and the jonquil abound,
the tulips are daily expected, and the lawn is of a rich and vivid green
that covers with shame the state in which you saw it. George Gammon
proves as regular as a set of false teeth and improves each shining
hour. In short the quite essential amiability of L.H. only deepens with
experience. Therefore see what a house I'm keeping for you....

But I am writing you a letter that _will_ burden you. I won't break
ground on the greater questions--though I think them--think _it_, at
least, in the U.S., the main one, extraordinarily interesting. To live
in England is, inevitably, to feel the "imperial" question in a
different way and take it at a different angle from what one might, with
the same mind even, do in America. Expansion has so made the English
what they are--for good or for ill, but on the whole for good--that one
doesn't quite feel one's way to say for one's country "No--I'll have
_none_ of it!" It has educated the English. Will it only demoralize
_us_? I suppose the answer to that is that we can get at home a bigger
education than they--in short as big a one as we require. Thank God,
however, I've no _opinions_--not even on the Dreyfus case. I'm more and
more only aware of things as a more or less mad panorama, phantasmagoria
and dime museum. It would take me longer than to finish this paper to
send you all the fond incitement or solicitation that I have on hand for
you or to work off my stored-up messages to your _Eltern_ and brethren.
There is time to talk of it, but I count on as many of you as possible
for next summer.... I hope you are conscious of a little tethering
string of attachment to the old mulberry in the garden, and am ever your
affectionate

HENRY JAMES.

P.S. Am just up again from such a sweet sunny spacious after-luncheon
stroll in the garden. You'll think it very vulgar of me, but I continue
to find it ravishing.




_To A. F. de Navarro._


Lamb House,
Rye.

Monday--Small hours--1.30 a.m.
[Feb. 27. 1899].

My dear Don Tony,

You can't say I overwhelm you with acknowledgments, din my gratitude
into your ear or make you curse the day you suffered a kindly impulse to
an intensely susceptible friend to get the better of your appreciation
of a quiet life. No--you can do none of these things. On the other hand
you can perhaps complete your graceful generosity by remembering that
your admirable little Xmas memento was accompanied with a "Now hold your
tongue!" almost as admirable in its distinguished consideration as the
felicitous object itself. It was, clearly, that you felt: "Oh yes, _of
course_ you're charmed: à qui le dites-vous? But for heaven's sake,
thanked to satiety as I am on all sides, don't set your ponderous
machinery in motion to drop the last straw!" So I've put out the fires
and stopped the wheels and paid off the stokers till now. I've held my
tongue like an angel, but I've thought of you--and of your matchless
mate--like--well, if not _a_, at least, _the_ devil, and at last the
whole shop insists on beginning again to hum. I cherish your so
periodical and so munificent thoughts of me as one of the good things of
this world of worries. Nothing ever touches me more. I am finally going
abroad for three months--on Tuesday or Wednesday, and the little
sensitive blank record, in its little green sheath, accompanies me--to
drink in Impressions--in the usual itinerant shrine of your gifts: my
left-hand upper waistcoat-pocket. There are vulgar things--a watch, an
eyeglass, seven-and-sixpence--in the other pockets; but nothing but
_you_ in that one. Voilà. I go to Italy after more than 5 years
interlude.

       *       *       *       *       *

Drama--tableau! My dear Tony, you are literally my saviour. The above
row of stars represents midnight emotions and palpitations of no mean
order. As I finished the line just before the stars I became aware that
a smell of smoke, a sense of burning that had worried me for the
previous hour, had suddenly very much increased and that the room was
full of it. _De fil en aiguille_, and in much anxiety, I presently
discovered that the said smoke was coming up through the floor between
the painted dark-green planks (_dark_ green!) of the margin--outside of
matting and rugs, and under a table near the fireplace. To assure myself
that there was no source of flame in the room below, and then to go up
and call my servant, do you see? (he long since snoring in bed--for it's
now 2.15 a.m.) was the work of a moment. With such tools as we could
command we hacked and pried and sawed and tore up a couple of
planks--from which volumes of smoke issued!! Do you see the midnight
little flurry? Bref, we got _at_ it--a charred,
smouldering--_long_-smouldering, I suppose--beam under, or almost under,
the hearthstone and in process of time kindled--that is heated to
smoking-point by its temperature (that of the hearth,) which was very
high. We put him out, we made him stop, with soaked sponges--and then
the relief: even while gazing at the hacked and smashed and disfigured
floors. Now my man is gone to bed, and I, rather enlivened for immediate
sleep, sit and watch by the scene of the small scare and finish my
letter to you: really, you know, to grasp your hand, to hang upon your
neck, in gratitude, you being at the bottom of the whole thing. I sat up
late in the first instance to write to you, because I knew I shouldn't
have time to-morrow: and it was because I did so that I was saved a much
worse later alarm. Two or three hours hence the smoke would have
penetrated to the rest of the house and we should have started up to
"fly round" to a much livelier tune.

Bravo, then, again, dear indispensable man! How I feel with magnificent
Mrs Tony--for if you're such an "A no. 1" guardian-angel to my house,
what are you to your own? The only thing is that I was going to write to
you of two or three other things and this stupid little accident has
smoked them all out. I've lent this really most amiable little old house
to Jonathan Sturges while I'm away--and he's to come as soon as he can.
He has been wretched, as you know, with poisonous influenza, but I went
up to town to see him a few days since, and he seemed really mending. He
was here a long time in the autumn and the early winter and our
conversation hung and hovered about you. Good night--it's 2.45 and all's
well. I _must_ turn in. I grovel before your wife--and take endless
liberties with your son--and am yours--after all this--more than
ever--much as _that_ was--

HENRY JAMES.

P.S. _Tuesday night._ This, my dear Tony, is a sorrier postscript than I
expected. I had just--on Sunday night, in the small hours--signed my
name as above when my fond delusion of the cessation of my scare dropped
from me and I became aware that I had, really, a fire "on." The rest was
sad--and I can't detail it--but I've got off wondrous easy. We got the
brave pumpers with creditable promptitude--they were thoroughly up to
the mark--above all without trop de zèle--and the damage is limited
wholly to one side of two rooms--especially the room I was writing to
you in so blandly. The pumpers were here till 5--and I slept not till
the following (last) night. Still more, therefore, I repeat, it was you
preserved me. _Finishing_ my letter to you kept me on the spot and being
on the spot was all. If I had had my head under the bed-clothes I
wouldn't--_couldn't_ have sniffed till two or three hours later, when
headway would have been gained--and headway would have doubled,
quadrupled damage, and perhaps even deprived you of this missive--and
its author--altogether. Aussi je vous embrasse--and am your startled but
re-quieted and fully insured H. J.

P.P.S. But look out for insidious _under_-fireplace-and-hearth tricks
and traps in old houses!

P.S. Will you very kindly tell Frank Millet that I think of him with
pride and joy and want so excruciatingly to see him and turn him on,
that if I were stopping at home these next months I should extend toward
him a long persuasive, somehow ingeniously alluring arm.




_To Edward Warren._

(Telegram.)


(Rye, 9.38 a.m., Feb. 27, 1899.)

Am asking very great favour of your coming down for inside of day or for
night if possible house took fire last night but only Green Room and
Dining Room affected hot hearth in former igniting old beam beneath with
tiresome consequences but excellent local brigade's help am now helpless
in face of reconstructions of injured portions and will bless you
mightily if you come departure of course put off Henry James.




_To William James._


Le Plantier,
Costebelle,
Hyères.

April 22nd, 1899.

Dearest William,

I greatly appreciate the lucidity and liberality of your so interesting
letter of the 19th, telling me of your views and prospects for next
summer &c--of all of which I am now able to make the most intimate
profit. I enter fully into your reasons for wanting to put in the summer
quietly and concentratedly in Cambridge--so much that with work
unfinished and a spacious house and library of your "very own" to
contain you, I ask myself how you can be expected to do anything less.
Only it all seems to mean that I shall see you all but scantly and
remotely. However, I shall wring from it when the time comes every
concession that can be snatched, and shall meanwhile watch your signs
and symptoms with my biggest opera-glass (the beautiful one, one of the
treasures of my life: que je vous dois.)

Nothing you tell me gives me greater pleasure than what you say of the
arrangements made for Harry and Billy in the forest primeval and the
vision of their drawing therefrom experiences of a sort that I too
miserably lacked (poor Father!) in my own too casual youth. What I most
of all feel, and in the light of it conjure you to keep doing for them,
is their being _à même_ to contract local saturations and attachments in
respect to their _own_ great and glorious country, to learn, and strike
roots into, its infinite beauty, as I suppose, and variety. Then they
won't, as I do now, have to assimilate, but half-heartedly, the alien
splendours--inferior ones too, as I believe--of the indigestible midi of
Bourget and the Vicomte Melchior de Vogüé, kindest of hosts and most
brilliant of _commensaux_ as I am in the act of finding both these
personages. The beauty here is, after my long stop at home, admirable
and exquisite; but make the boys, none the less, stick fast and sink up
to their necks in everything their _own_ countries and climates can give
de pareil et de supérieur. Its being that "own" will double their _use_
of it.... This little estate (two houses--near together--in a 25-acre
walled "parc" of dense pine and cedar, along a terraced mountain-side,
with exquisite views inland and to the sea) is a precious and enviable
acquisition. The walks are innumerable, the pleasant "wildness" of the
land (universally accessible) only another form of sweetness, and the
light, the air, the noble, graceful lines &c, all of the first order.
It's classic--Claude--Virgil....

I expect to get to Genoa on the 4th or 5th April, and there to make up
my mind as to how I can best spend the following eight weeks, in Italy,
in evasion and seclusion. Unhappily I _must_ go to Rome, and Rome is
infernal. But I shall make short work of it. My nostalgia for Lamb House
is already such as to make me capable de tout. _Never_ again will I
leave it. I don't take you up on the Philippines--I admire you and agree
with you too much. You have an admirable eloquence. But the age is _all_
to the vulgar!... Farewell with a wide embrace.

Ever your
HENRY.




_To Howard Sturgis._


Hôtel de l'Europe, Rome.
May 19, 1899.

My dear Howard,

It's a great pleasure to hear from you in this far country--though I
greatly wish it weren't from the bed of anguish--or at any rate of
delicacy: if delicacy may be connected, that is, with anything so
indelicate as a bed! But I'm very glad to gather that it's the couch of
convalescence. Only, if you have a Back, for heaven's sake take care of
it. When I was about your age--in 1862!--I did a bad damage (by a strain
subsequently--through crazy juvenility--neglected) to mine; the
consequence of which is that, in spite of retarded attention, and years,
really, of recumbency, later, I've been saddled with it for life, and
that even now, my dear Howard, I verily write you _with_ it. I even
wrote _The Awkward Age_ with it: therefore look sharp! I wanted
especially to send you that volume--as an "acknowledgment" of princely
hospitalities received, and formed the intention of so doing even in the
too scant moments we stood face to face among the Rembrandts. That's
right--_be_ one of the few! I greatly applaud the tact with which you
tell me that scarce a human being will understand a word, or an
intention, or an artistic element or glimmer of any sort, of my book. I
tell _myself_--and the "reviews" tell me--such truths in much cruder
fashion. But it's an old, old story--and if I "minded" now as much as I
once did, I should be well beneath the sod. Face to face I should be
able to say a bit how I saw--and why I _so_ saw--my subject. But that
will keep.

I'm here in a warmish, quietish, emptyish, pleasantish (but not
maddeningly so,) altered and cockneyfied and scraped and all but
annihilated Rome. I return to England some time next month (to the
country--Lamb House, Rye--now my constant address--only.) ... However,
this is only to greet and warn you--and to be, my dear Howard, your
affectionate old friend,

HENRY JAMES.




_To Mrs. Humphry Ward._

     The allusions at the end of this letter are to the visit paid by H.
     J. to Mr. and Mrs. Humphry Ward at the Villa Barberini, Castel
     Gandolfo, during his stay in Italy. Mrs. Ward has described the
     excursion to Nemi, "the strawberries and Aristodemo," in _A
     Writer's Recollections_, pp. 327-9.


Lamb House, Rye.
July 10th, 1899.

Dear Mrs. Ward,

I have a very bad conscience and a very heavy heart about my failure to
communicate with you again before you left Rome--for I heard
(afterwards--_much_ afterwards) that you had had final trouble and
inconvenience--that Miss Gertrude, brave being, tempted providence--by
her very bravery--to renew its assaults--and that illness and
complications encumbered your last steps. On the subject of all this I
ought long since to have condoled with you, in default of having
condoled at the time--yet lo, I have shamefully waited for the ignoble
facility of my own table and inkstand, to which, after too prolonged a
separation, I have but just been restored. I got home--from Turin--but
three days ago--and very, very cool and green and wholesome (though only
comparatively, I admit) does this little insular nook appear. After I
last saw you I too was caught up, if not cast down, by the
Fates--whirled, by irresistible Marion Crawfords--off to Sorrento,
Capri, Naples--all of which had not been in the least in my
programme--thence, afterwards, to live in heat and hurry and
inconvenient submission and compromise--till Florence, in its turn, made
a long arm and pocketed me (oh, so stuffily!) till but a few days ago.
All this time I've been the slave of others--and I return to a perfect
mountain of unforwarded (by a rash and delusive policy) postal matter.
But I bore through the mountain straight at Stocks--or even, according
to an intimation you gave me, at Grosvenor Place. I heartily hope all
the crumples and stains of travel have by this time been washed and
smoothed away--and that you have nothing but romantic recollections and
regrets. I pray Miss Ward be wholly at her ease again and that, somehow
or other, you may have woven a big piece of your tapestry. I should say,
frankly, "Mayn't I come down and _see_?--or hear?" were it not that I
return to fearful arrears myself, and restored to this small temple of
application, from which I've so long been absent, feel absolutely
obliged to sit tight for several weeks to come. Later in the summer, if
you'll let me, I _shall_ ask for an invitation. If all this while I've
not sent you _The Awkward Age_ it has been because I thought it not fair
to make any such appeal to your attention while you were preoccupied and
worried. Perhaps--absolutely, in fact--I wanted the book to reach you at
a moment when the coast might be comparatively clear. Possibly it isn't
clear even now. At all events I am writing to Heinemann to-day to
despatch to you the volume. But _please_ don't look at it till all the
elements of leisure--margin--peace of mind--lend themselves. And don't
answer _this_. You have far other business in hand.

My four months in Italy did more for me, I imagine, than I shall yet
awhile know. One must draw on them a little to find out. Doubtless you
are drawing hard on yours. For me (I am clear about that) the Nemi Lake,
and the walk down and up (the latter perhaps most,) and the strawberries
and Aristodemo were the cream. It will be a joy to have it all out again
with you and to hear of your other adventures. I hope Miss Dorothy and
Miss Janet (please tell them) are finding London, if you _are_ still
there, _come si deve_. Yours and theirs and Humphry's, dear Mrs. Ward,
very constantly,

HENRY JAMES.




_To Mrs. Humphry Ward._

     It will be understood that Mrs. Ward had consulted H. J. on certain
     details, relating in particular to the American background of one
     of the characters in her forthcoming novel _Eleanor_, the scene of
     which was partly laid at Castel Gandolfo.


Lamb House, Rye.
Sunday. [July 1899].

Dear Mrs. Ward,

I return the proofs of _Eleanor_, in a separate cover from this, and as
I think it wise to _register_ them I must wait till to-morrow a.m. to do
that, and this, therefore, will reach you first. Let me immediately say
that I don't light (and I've read carefully every word, and many two or
three times, as Mr. Bellasis would say--and is Mr. B., by the way,
naturally--as it were--H. J.???!!! on any peccant particular spots in
the aspect of Lucy F. that the American reader would challenge. I do
think he, or she, may be likely, at first, to think her more English
than American--to say, I mean: "Why, this isn't _us_--it's English
'Dissent.'" For it's well--generally--to keep in mind how very different
a thing that is (socially, aesthetically &c.) from the American free
(and easy) multitudinous churches, that, practically, in any community,
are like so many (almost) clubs or Philharmonics or amateur theatrical
companies. I _don't_ quite think the however obscure American girl I
gather you to conceive would have any shockability about Rome, the Pope,
St. Peter's, kneeling, or anything of that sort--least of all any girl
whose concatenations _could_, by any possibility of social handing-on,
land her in the milieu you present at Albano. She would probably be
either a Unitarian or "Orthodox" (which is, I believe, "Congregational,"
though in New England always called "Orthodox") and in either case as
Emersonized, Hawthornized, J. A. Symondsized, and as "frantic" to _feel_
the Papacy &c, as one could well represent her. And this, I mean, even
were she of any provincial New England circle whatever that one could
conceive as ramifying, however indirectly, into Villa Barb. This
particularly were her father a college professor. In that case I should
say "The bad clothes &c, oh yes; as much as you like. The beauty &c,
_scarcely_. The offishness to Rome--as a spectator &c.--almost not at
all." All this, roughly and hastily speaking. But there is no false note
of surface, beyond this, I think, that you need be uneasy about at all.
Had I looked over your shoulder I should have said: "_Specify_,
localise, a little more--give her a _definite_ Massachusetts, or Maine,
or whatever, habitation--imagine a country-college-town--invent, if need
be, a name, and stick to that." This for smallish, but appreciable
reasons that I haven't space to develop--but after all not imperative.
For the rest the chapters you send me are, as a beginning, to my vision
very charming and interesting and pleasing--full of promise of strong
elements--as your beginnings always are.

And may I say (as I _can_ read nothing, if I read it at all, save in the
light of how one would _one's self_ proceed in tackling the same
_data_!) just two other things? One is that I think your material
suffers a little from the fact that the reader feels you approach your
subject too _immediately_, show him its elements, the cards in your
hand, too bang off from the first page--so that a wait to begin to guess
_what and whom the thing is going to be about_ doesn't impose itself:
the ante-chamber or two and the crooked corridor before he is already in
the Presence. The other is that you don't give him a positive sense of
dealing with your subject from its logical centre. This centre I
gathered to be, from what you told me in Rome (and one gathers it also
from the title,) the consciousness of Eleanor--to which all the rest
(Manisty, Lucy, the whole phantasmagoria and drama) is presented by
life. I should have urged you: "Make that consciousness full, rich,
universally prehensile and _stick_ to it--don't shift--and don't shift
_arbitrarily_--how, otherwise, do you get your unity of subject or keep
up your reader's sense of it?" To which, if you say: How then do I get
_Lucy's_ consciousness, I impudently retort: "By that magnificent and
masterly _indirectness_ which means the _only_ dramatic straightness and
intensity. You get it, in other words, by Eleanor." "And how does
Eleanor get it?" "By _Everything_! By Lucy, by Manisty, by every pulse
of the action in which she is engaged and of which she is the
fullest--an exquisite--register. Go behind _her_--miles and miles; don't
go behind the others, or the subject--_i.e._ the unity of
impression--goes to smash." But I am going too far--and this is more
than you will have bargained for. On these matters there is far too much
to say. This makes me all the more sorry that, in answer to your kind
invitation for the last of this month, I greatly fear I can't leave home
for several weeks to come. I am in hideous backwardness with duties that
after a long idleness (six full months!) have awaited me here--and I am
cultivating "a unity of impression!" In _October_ with joy.

Your history of your journey from V.B., your anxieties, complications,
horrid tension and tribulation, draws hot tears from my eyes. I blush
for the bleak inn at the bare Simplon. I only meant it for rude,
recovered health. Poor Miss Gertrude--heroine partout et toujours--and
so privately, modestly, exquisitely. Give her, please, all my present
benediction. And forgive my horrid, fatigued hieroglyphics. Do let me
have more of "Eleanor"--to re-write! And believe me, dear Mrs. Ward,
ever constantly yours,

HENRY JAMES.

_P.S._ I've on reflection determined that as a _registered_ letter may
not, perhaps, reach Stocks till Tuesday a.m. and you wish to despatch
for Wednesday's steamer, it is my "higher duty" to send the proofs off
in ordinary form, apart from this, but to-night. May it be for the best!

H. J.




_To Mrs. Humphry Ward._


Lamb House, Rye.
July 26th, 1899.

Dear Mrs. Ward,

I beg you not to believe that if you elicit a reply from me--to your so
interesting letter just received--you do so at any cost to any extreme
or uncomfortable pressure that I'm just now under. I am always behind
with everything--and it's no worse than usual. Besides I shall be very
brief.[A] But I must say two or three words--not only because these are
the noblest speculations that can engage the human mind, but because--to
a degree that distresses me--you labour under two or three mistakes as
to what, the other day, I at all wanted to express. I don't myself, for
that matter, recognise what you mean by any "old difference" between us
on _any_ score--and least of all when you appear to glance at it as an
opinion of mine (if I understand you, that is,) as to there being but
_one general_ "hard and fast rule of _presentation_." I protest that I
have never had with you any difference--consciously--on any such point,
and rather resent, frankly, your attributing to me a judgment so
imbecile. I hold that there are five million such "rules" (or as many as
there are subjects in all the world--I fear the subjects are _not_
5,000,000!) only each of them imposed, artistically, by the particular
case--involved in the writer's responsibility to it; and each
_then_--and then only--"hard and fast" with an immitigable hardness and
fastness. I don't see, _without_ this latter condition, where any work
of art, any artistic _question_ is, or any artistic probity. Of course,
a 1000 times, there are as many magnificent and imperative cases as you
like of presenting a thing by "going behind" as many forms of
consciousness as you like--all Dickens, Balzac, Thackeray, Tolstoi (save
when they use the autobiographic dodge,) are huge illustrations of it.
But they are illustrations of extreme and calculated selection, or
singleness, too, whenever that has been, by the case, imposed on them.
My own immortal works, for that matter, if I may make bold, are
recognizable instances of all the variation. I "go behind" right and
left in "The Princess Casamassima," "The Bostonians," "The Tragic
Muse," just as I do the same but singly in "The American" and "Maisie,"
and just as I do it consistently _never at all_ (save for a false and
limited _appearance_, here and there, of doing it a _little_, which I
haven't time to explain) in "The Awkward Age." So far from not seeing
what you mean in _Pêcheur d'Islande_, I see it as a most beautiful
example--a crystal-clear one. It's a picture of a _relation_ (a _single_
relation) and that relation isn't given at all unless given on both
sides, because, practically, there are no other relations to make
_other_ feet for the situation to walk withal. The logic jumps at the
eyes. Therefore acquit me, please, _please_, of anything so abject as
putting forward anything at once specific and _a priori_. "Then why," I
hear you ask, "do you pronounce for _my book_ a priori?" Only because of
a mistake, doubtless, for which I do here humble penance--that of
assuming too precipitately, and with the freedom of an inevitably
too-foreshortened letter, that I was dealing with it _a
posteriori_!--and _that_ on the evidence of only those few pages and of
a somewhat confused recollection of what, in Rome, you told me of your
elements. Or rather--more correctly--I was giving way to my irresistible
need of wondering how, _given_ the subject, one could best work one's
self into the presence of it. And, lo and behold, the subject isn't (of
course, in so scant a show and brief a piece) "given" at all--I have
doubtless simply, with violence and mutilation, _stolen_ it. It is of
the nature of that violence that I'm a wretched person to _read_ a
novel--I begin so quickly and concomitantly, _for myself_, to write it
rather--even before I know clearly what it's about! The novel I can
_only_ read, I can't read at all! And I had, to be just with me, one
attenuation--I thought I gathered from the pages already absorbed that
your _parti pris_ as to your process with "Eleanor" was already
defined--and defined as "dramatic"--and that was a kind of _lead_: the
people all, as it were, phenomenal to a particular imagination (hers)
and that imagination, with all its contents, phenomenal to the reader.
I, in fine, just rudely and egotistically thrust forward the beastly way
_I_ should have done it. But there is too much to say about these
things--and I am writing too much--and yet haven't said half I want
to--_and_, above all, there _being_ so much, it is doubtless better not
to attempt to say pen in hand what one can say but so partially. And yet
I _must_ still add one or two things more. What I said above about the
"rule" of presentation being, in each case, hard and fast, _that_ I will
go to the stake and burn with slow fire for--the slowest that will burn
at all. I hold the artist must (infinitely!) know how he is doing it, or
he is not doing it at all. I hold he must have a perception of the
interests of his subject that grasps him as in a vise, and that (the
subject being of course formulated in his mind) he sees _as_ sharply the
way that most presents it, and presents most of it, as against the ways
that comparatively give it away. And he must there choose and stick and
be consistent--and that is the hard-and-fastness and the vise. I am
afraid I _do_ differ with you if you mean that the picture can get any
_objective_ unity from any other source than that; can get it from,
e.g., the "personality of the author." From the personality of the
author (which, however enchanting, is a thing for the reader only, and
not for the author himself, without humiliating abdications, to my
sense, to count in at all) it can get nothing but a unity of execution
and of tone. There is no short cut for the subject, in other words, out
of the process, which, having made out most what it (the subject) is,
_treats_ it most, handles it, in that relation, with the most consistent
economy. May I say, to exonerate myself a little, that when, e.g., I
see you make Lucy "phenomenal" to Eleanor (one has to express it briefly
and somehow,) I find myself supposing completely that you "know how
you're doing it," and enjoy, as critic, the sweet peace that comes with
that sense. But I haven't the sense that you "know how you're doing it"
when, at the point you've reached, I see you make Lucy phenomenal, even
for one attempted stroke, to the little secretary of embassy. And the
reason of this is that Eleanor counts as presented, and thereby _is_
something to go behind. The secretary _doesn't_ count as presented (and
isn't he moreover engaged, at the very moment--_your_ moment--in being
phenomenal himself, to Lucy?) and is therefore, practically, _nothing_
to go behind. The promiscuous shiftings of standpoint and centre of
Tolstoi and Balzac for instance (which come, to my eye, from their being
not so much big dramatists as big _painters_--as Loti is a painter,) are
the inevitable result of the _quantity of presenting_ their genius
launches them in. With the complexity they pile up they _can_ get no
clearness without trying again and again for new centres. And they don't
_always_ get it. However, I don't mean to say they don't get enough. And
I hasten to add that you have--I wholly recognise--every right to reply
to me: "Cease your intolerable chatter and dry up your preposterous
deluge. If you will have the decent civility to _wait_, you will see
that _I_ 'present' also--_anch' io!_--enough for _every_ freedom I use
with it!"--_And with my full assent to that, and my profuse_ prostration
in the dust for this extravagant discourse, with all faith, gratitude,
appreciation and affection, I _do_ cease, dear Mrs. Ward, I dry up! and
am yours most breathlessly,

HENRY JAMES.

[A] Later!!!! Latest. Don't rejoin!--_don't!_




_To Mrs. A. F. de Navarro._

     The "priceless volume" was an album belonging to Mrs. de Navarro
     (Miss Mary Anderson), in which she had asked H. J. to inscribe some
     words. His contribution, given below, recalls a memory of Miss
     Anderson before she left the stage.


Lamb House, Rye.
Oct. 13: 1899.

Dearest, greatest lady,

I've filled a page, with my horrid hieroglyphics, in the priceless
volume--and my characters are the more unsightly for having to be
squeezed in--for I found that to point my little moral I had to take
more than 20 words. Forgive their sad futility. I hope I understood you
right--that I was to do it _opposite_ Watts--I obeyed your law to what I
supposed to be the letter. If I'm not quite correct, I can assure you
that it will be the only time I shall ever break it! Yours and Tony's
very constantly,

HENRY JAMES.

P.S. The volume goes by _to-morrow_ a.m.'s post; tenderly and stoutly
wrapped, violently sealed, convulsively corded and rigorously
registered. Bon voyage!




THE GOLDEN DREAM.

A LITTLE TALE.


It was in the days of his golden dreams that he first saw her, and she
immediately became one of them--made them glow with a new rosy fire. The
first night, on leaving the theatre in his breathless ecstasy, he could
scarce compose himself to go home: he wandered over the town, murmuring
to himself "I want, oh I want to write something for her!" He went again
and again to see her--he was always there, and after each occasion, and
even as the months and years rolled by, kept repeating to himself, and
even to others, what he _did_ want to. Now one of these others was his
great friend, who irritated and probably jealous, coldly and cynically
replied: "You may want to, but you won't. No, you will never write
anything."

"I will!" he vehemently insisted. And he added in presumptuous
confidence: "Just wait till she asks me!" And so they kept it up, and he
said _that_ too often for the G.F., who, exasperated, ended by
retorting:

"She never will!"

"Well, you see if she doesn't!"

"You must think--" said the G.F. scathingly.

"Well, what?"

"Why, that she thinks you're somebody."

"She'll find out in time that I _am_. _Then_ she'll ask me."

"Ask _who_ you are?"

"No"--with majesty. "To write something."

"Then I shall be sorry for her. Because you won't."

"Why not?"

"Because you _can't_!"

"Oh!" But the months and years revolved and at last his dream came true;
also it befell that, just at the same moment, the G.F. reappeared; to
whom he broke out ecstatically: "I told you so! She _has_ found out! She
_has_ asked me."

The G.F. was imperturbable. "What's the use? You can't."

"You'll see if I can't!" And he sat down and tried. Oh, he tried
long--he tried hard. But the G.F. was right. It was too late. He
couldn't.

HENRY JAMES.

Lamb House, Rye. Oct. 13, 1899.




_To Sidney Colvin._


     The following refers to R. L. Stevenson's _Letters to his Family
     and Friends_, edited by Sir Sidney Colvin. H. J.'s article appeared
     in the _North American Review_, January 1900, and was afterwards
     reprinted in _Notes on Novelists_.

Lamb House, Rye.
Wednesday night.

[October 1899.]

My dear Colvin,

Many things hindered my quietly and immediately reabsorbing the
continuity of the two gathered volumes, and I have delayed till this the
acknowledgment of your letter (sent a few days after them,) I having
already written (hadn't I?) before the letter arrived. I have spent much
of the last two days with them--beautifully and sadly enough. I think
you need have no doubt as to the impression the constituted book will
make--it will be one of extraordinarily rare, particular and individual
beauty. I want to write about it really critically, if I can--i.e.
intelligently and interpretatively--but I sigh before the difficulty.
Still, I shall probably try. One thing it seems to me I foresee--i.e. a
demand for _more_ letters. There _are_ more publishable?--aren't there?
But you will tell me of this. How extraordinarily fine the long (almost
last of all) one to his cousin Bob! If there were only more _de cette
force_! But there couldn't be. "I _think_ I think" the impression more
_equal_ than you do--indeed some of the early ones better than the
earlier ones after expatriation. But the whole series reek with charm
and hum with genius. It will serve as a _high_ memorial--by which I mean
as a large (comprehensive) one. Remember that I shall be delighted to
see you on the 18th. I _may_ be alone--or Jon Sturges may be here.
Probably nessun' altro. Please communicate your decision as to this at
your convenience. If not _then_, then on one of the next Saturdays, I
hope!

What horridly overdarkening S. African news! One must sit close--but for
too long.

Yours ever,
HENRY JAMES.

P.S. Re-reading your letter makes me feel I haven't perhaps answered
enough your query about early vol. I. I don't, however, see what you
need be uneasy about. The young flame of life and agitation of genius in
them flickers and heaves only to make one regret whatever (more) is
_not_ there: _never_ to make one feel your discretion has anywhere been
at fault. I'm not sure I don't think it has erred a little on the side
of over-suppression. One has the vague sense of omissions and
truncations--one _smells_ the things unprinted. However, that doubtless
had to be. But I don't see _any_ mistake you have made. With less, there
would have been no history--and one wants what made, what makes for his
history. It _all_ does--and so would more. But you have given nothing
that valuably doesn't. Be at peace.

H. J.




_To Edmund Gosse._

     This refers to a suggestion that Stevenson's body should be removed
     from his place of burial, on the mountain-top above Vailima, and
     brought home.


Lamb House, Rye.
Sunday [Nov. 12, 1899].

My dear Gosse,

I wholly agree with you as to any motion toward the preposterous and
unseemly deportation from their noble resting-place of those illustrious
and helpless ashes. I find myself, somehow, unable to think of Louis in
these days (much more to speak of him) without an emotion akin to tears;
and such blatant busybody ineptitude causes the cup to overflow and
sickens as well as enrages. But nothing but cheap newspaperism will come
of it--it has in it the power, fortunately, to drop, utterly and
abysmally, if not _touched_--if decently ignored. Don't write a
protest--don't write _anything_: simply _hush_! The _lurid_ asininity of
the hour!

...I will write you about your best train Saturday--which heaven speed!
It will probably be the 3.23 from Charing Cross--better, really, than
the (new) 5.15 from St. Paul's. I find S. Africa a nightmare and need
cheering. Arrive therefore primed for that office.

Ever yours,
HENRY JAMES.




_To Miss Henrietta Reubell._


Lamb House, Rye.
Sunday midnight.

[Nov. 12th, 1899.]

Dear Miss Reubell,

I have had great pleasure of your last good letter and this is a word of
fairly prompt reconnaissance. Your bewilderment over _The Awkward Age_
doesn't on the whole surprise me--for that ingenious volume appears to
have excited little _but_ bewilderment--except indeed, _here_,
thick-witted denunciation. A work of art that one has to _explain_ fails
in so far, I suppose, of its mission. I suppose I must at any rate
mention that I had in view a certain special social (highly "modern" and
actual) London group and type and tone, which seemed to me to se prêter
à merveille to an ironic--lightly and simply ironic!--treatment, and
that clever people at least would know who, in general, and what, one
meant. But here, at least, it appears there are very few clever people!
One must point with finger-posts--one must label with _pancartes_--one
must explain with _conférences_! The _form_, doubtless, of my picture is
against it--a form all dramatic and scenic--of presented episodes,
architecturally combined and each making a piece of the building; with
no going behind, no _telling about_ the figures save by their own
appearance and action and with explanations reduced to the explanation
of everything by all the other things _in_ the picture. Mais il parait
qu'il ne faut pas faire comme ça: personne n'y comprend rien: j'en suis
pour mes frais--qui avaient été considérables, très considérables! Yet I
seem to make out you were interested--and that consoles me. I think Mrs.
Brook the best thing I've ever done--and Nanda also much _done_. Voilà!
Mitchy marries Aggie by a calculation--in consequence of a state of
mind--delicate and deep, but that I meant to show on his part as highly
conceivable. It's absolute to him that N. will never have him--and she
_appeals_ to him for another girl, whom she sees him as "saving" (from
things--realities she sees). If he does it (and she shows how she values
him by wanting it) it is still a way of getting and keeping near her--of
making for _her_, to him, a tie of gratitude. She becomes, as it were,
to him, responsible for his happiness--they can't (_especially if the
marriage goes ill_) _not_ be--given the girl that Nanda is--more, rather
than less, together. And the _finale_ of the picture _justifies_ him: it
leaves Nanda, precisely, with his case on her hands. Far-fetched? Well,
I daresay: but so are diamonds and pearls and the beautiful Reubell
turquoises! So I scribble to you, to be sociable, by my loud-ticking
clock, in this sleeping little town, at my usual more than midnight
hour.

...Well, also, I'm like you--I like growing (that is I like, for many
reasons, _being_) old: 56! But I don't like growing _older_. I quite
love my present age and the compensations, simplifications, freedom,
independences, memories, advantages of it. But I don't keep it long
enough--it passes too quickly. But it mustn't pass _all_ (good as that
is) in writing to _you_! There is nothing I shall like more to dream of
than to be convoyed by you to the expositionist Kraals of the Savages
and the haunts of the cannibals. I surrender myself to you de
confiance--in vision and hope--for that purpose. Jonathan Sturges lives,
year in, year out, at Long's Hotel, Bond St., and promises to come down
here and see me, but never does. He knows hordes of people, every one
extraordinarily likes him, and he has tea-parties for pretty ladies: one
at a time. Alas, he is three quarters of the time ill; but his little
spirit is colossal. Sargent grows in weight, honour and interest--to
_my_ view. He does one fine thing after another--and his crucifixion
(that is big Crucifié with Adam and Eve under each arm of cross catching
drops of blood) for Boston Library is a most noble, grave and admirable
thing. But it's already to-morrow and I am yours always,

HENRY JAMES.




_To H. G. Wells._


Lamb House, Rye.
November 20th, 1899.

My dear H. G. Wells,

You reduce me to mere gelatinous grovel. And the worst of it is that you
know so well how. You, with a magnanimity already so marked as to be
dazzling, sent me last summer a beautiful and discouraging volume which
I never mastered the right combination of minutes and terms to thank you
for as it deserved--and then, perfectly aware that this shameful
consciousness had practically converted me to quivering pulp, you let
fly the shaft that has finished me in the fashion to which I now so
distressfully testify. It is really most kind and charming of you, and
the incident will figure largely in all your eventual biographies: yet
it is almost more than I can bear. Seriously, I am extremely touched by
your great humanity in the face of my atrocious bad manners. I think the
reason _why_ I didn't write to thank you for the magnificent romance of
three or four months ago was that I simply dreaded a new occasion for
still more purple perjury on the subject of coming over to see you! I
_was_--I _am_!--coming: and yet I couldn't--and I _can't_--say it
without steeping myself afresh in apparent falsehood, to the eyes. It is
a weird tale of the _acharnement_ of fate against an innocent action--I
mean the history of my now immemorial failure: which I must not attempt
to tell you thus and now, but reserve for your convinced (from the
moment it isn't averted) ear on the day, and at the very hour and
moment, that failure is converted to victory. I AM coming. I was lately
extremely sorry to hear that you have been somewhat unwell again--unless
it be a gross exaggeration. Heaven send that same. I AM coming. I thank
you very cordially for the two beautiful books. The new tales I have
already absorbed and, to the best of my powers, assimilated. You fill me
with wonder and admiration. I think you have too great an unawareness of
difficulty--and (for instance) that the four big towns and nice blue
foods and belching news-trumpets, etc., will be the _least_ of the
differences in the days to come.--But it's unfair to say that without
saying a deal more: which I can't, and [which] isn't worth it--and is
besides irrelevant and ungracious. Your spirit is huge, your fascination
irresistible, your resources infinite. _That_ is much more to the point.
And I AM coming. I heartily hope that if you _have_ been incommoded it
is already over, and for a corrigible cause. I AM coming. Recall me,
please, kindly to Mrs. Wells, and believe me (I AM coming,) very truly
(_and_ veraciously) yours,

HENRY JAMES.




_To Charles Eliot Norton._


_Dictated._

Lamb House, Rye.
* _Please read postscript first._
24 November 1899.

My dear Charles,

I heartily welcomed your typed letter of a couple of months ago, both
for very obvious and for respectable subsidiary reasons. I am almost
altogether reduced--I would much rather say promoted--to type myself,
and to communicate with a friend who is in the same predicament only
adds to the luxury of the business. I was never intended by nature to
write--much less to be, without anguish, read; and I have recognised
that perfectly patent law late in the day only, when I might so much
better have recognised it early. It would have made a great difference
in my life--made me a much more successful person. But "the New England
conscience" interposed; suggesting that the sense of being so
conveniently assisted could only proceed, somehow, from the abyss. So I
floundered and fumbled and failed, through long years for the mere want
of the small dose of cynical courage required for recognising frankly my
congenital inaptitude. Another proof, or presumption, surely, of the
immortality of the soul. It takes one whole life--for some persons, at
least, _dont je suis_--to learn how to live at all; which is absurd if
there is not to be another in which to apply the lesson. I feel that in
_my_ next career I shall start, in this particular at least, from the
first, straight. Thank heaven I don't write such a hand as you! Then
where would my conscience be?

You wrote me from Ashfield, and I can give you more than country for
country, as I am still, thank heaven, out of town--which is more and
more my predominant and natural state. I am only reacting, I suppose,
against many, many long years of London, which has ended by giving me a
deep sense of the quantity of "cry" in all that life compared to the
almost total absence of "wool." By which I mean, simply, that
acquaintances and relations there have a way of seeming at last to end
in smoke--while having consumed a great deal of fuel and taken a great
deal of time. I dare say I shall some day re-establish the balance, and
I have kept my habitation there, though I let it whenever I can; but at
present I am as conscious of the advantage of the Sussex winter as of
that of the Sussex summer. But I've just returned from three days in
London, mainly taken up with seeing my brother William as to whom your
letter contained an anxious inquiry to which I ought before this to have
done justice. The difficulty has been, these three months, that he has
been working, with the most approved medical and "special" aid, for a
change of condition, which one hoped would have been apparent by now--so
that one might have good news to give. I am sorry to say the change
remains, as yet, but imperfectly apparent--though I dare say it has,
within the last month, really begun. His German cure--Nauheim--was a
great disappointment; but he is at present in the hands of the best
London man, who professes himself entirely content with results actually
reached. The misfortune is that the regimen and treatment--the "last
new" one--are superficially depressing and weakening even when they are
doing the right work; and from that, now, I take William to be
suffering. Ci vuol pazienza! He will probably spend the winter in
England, whatever happens. Only, alas, his Edinburgh lectures are
indefinitely postponed--and other renouncements, of an unenlivening
sort, have had, as indispensable precautions and prudences, to follow.
They have placed their little girl very happily at school, near Windsor;
they are in convenient occupation, at present, of my London apartment;
and luckily the autumn has been, as London autumns go, quite
cheerfully--distinguishably--crepuscular. I am two hours and a half from
town; which is far enough, thank heaven, not to be near, and yet near
enough, from the point of view of shillings, invasions and other
complications, not to be far; they have been with me for a while, and I
am looking for them again for longer. William is able, fortunately, more
or less to read, and strikes me as so richly prepared, by an immense
quantity of this--to speak of that feature alone--for the Edinburgh
lectures--that the pity of the frustration comes home the more. A truce,
however, to this darksome picture--which may very well yet improve.

I went, a month ago, during a day or two in town, down to Rottingdean to
lunch with the Kiplings (those Brighton trains are wondrous!) but
failed, to my regret, to see Lady Burne-Jones, their immediate neighbor,
as of course you know; who was perversely, though most accidentally,
from home. But they told me--and it was the first I knew--of her big
project of publishing the dear beautiful man's correspondence: copious,
it appears, in a degree of which I had not a conception. Living, in
London, near him, though not seeing him, thanks to the same odious
London, half so often as I desired, I seldom heard from him on paper,
and hadn't, at all, in short, the measure of his being, as the K.'s
assured me he proves to have been, a "great letter-writer."


(28th Nov.)

I was interrupted, my dear Charles, the other day: difficulties then
multiplied, and I only now catch on again. I see, on reading over your
letter, that you are quite _au courant_ of Lady B. J.'s plan; and I of
course easily take in that she must have asked you, as one of his
closest correspondents, for valuable material. Yet I don't know that I
wholly echo your deprecation of these givings to the world. The best
letters seem to me the most delightful of all written things--and those
that are not the best the most negligible. If a correspondence, in other
words, has not the real charm, I wouldn't have it published even
privately; if it has, on the other hand, I would give it all the glory
of the greatest literature. B. J.'s, I should say, must have it (the
real charm)--since he did, as appears, surrender to it. Is this not so?
At all events we shall indubitably see.... As for B. J., I miss him not
less, but more, as year adds itself to year; and the hole he has left in
the London horizon, the eclipse of the West Kensington oasis, is a thing
much to help one to turn one's back on town: and this in spite of the
fact that his work, alas, had long ceased to interest me, with its
element of painful, niggling embroidery--the stitch-by-stitch process
that had come at last to beg the _painter_ question altogether. Even the
poetry--the kind of it--that he tried for appeared to me to have
wandered away from the real thing; and yet the being himself grew only
more loveable, natural and wise. Too late, too late! I gather, à propos
of him, that you have read Mackail's Morris; which seems to me quite
beautifully and artistically done--wonderful to say for a contemporary
English biography. It is really composed, the effect really produced--an
effect not altogether, I think, happy, or even endurable, as regards
Morris himself--for whom the formula strikes me as being--being at least
largely--that he was a boisterous, boyish, British man of action and
practical faculty, launched indeed by his imagination, but really
floundering and romping and roaring through the arts, both literary and
plastic, very much as a bull through a china-shop. I felt much moved,
after reading the book, to try to write, with the aid of some of my own
recollections and impressions, something possibly vivid about it; but we
are in a moment of such excruciating vulgarity that nothing worth doing
about anything or anyone seems to be wanted or welcomed anywhere. The
great little Rudyard--à propos of Rottingdean--struck me as quite on his
feet again, and very sane and sound and happy. Yet I am afraid you'll
think me a very disgusted person if I show my reserves, again, over
_his_ recent incarnations. I can't swallow his loud, brazen patriotic
verse--an exploitation of the patriotic idea, for that matter, which
seems to me not really much other than the exploitation of the name of
one's mother or one's wife. Two or three times a century--yes; but not
every month. He is, however, such an embodied little talent, so
economically constructed for all use and no waste, that he will get
again upon a good road--leading _not_ into mere multitudinous noise. His
talent I think quite diabolically great; and this in spite--here I am at
it again!--of the misguided, the unfortunate "Stalky." Stalky gives him
away, aesthetically, as a man in his really now, as regards our roaring
race, bardic condition, should not have allowed himself to be given.
That is not a thing, however, that, in our paradise of criticism,
appears to occur to so much as three persons, and meanwhile the sale, I
believe, is tremendous. Basta, basta.

We are living, of course, under the very black shadow of S. Africa,
where the nut is proving a terribly hard one to crack, and where, alas,
things will probably be worse before they are better. One ranges one's
self, on the whole, to the belief not only that they _will_ be better,
but that they really had to be taken in hand to be made so; they
wouldn't and couldn't do at all as they were. But the job is immense,
complicated as it is by distance, transport, and many preliminary
illusions and stupidities; friends moreover, right and left, have their
young barbarians in the thick of it and are living so, from day to day,
in suspense and darkness that, in certain cases, their images fairly
haunt one. It reminds me strangely of some of the far-away phases and
feelings of _our_ big, dim war. What tremendously ancient history that
now seems!--But I am launching at you, my dear Charles, a composition of
magnitude--when I meant only to encumber you with a good, affectionate
note. I have presently to take on myself a care that may make you smile;
nothing less than to proceed, a few moments hence, to Dover, to meet our
celebrated friend (I think she can't _not_ be yours) Mrs. Jack Gardner,
who arrives from Brussels, charged with the spoils of the Flemish
school, and kindly pays me a fleeting visit on her way up to town. I
must rush off, help her to disembark, see all her Van Eycks and Rubenses
through the Customs and bring her hither, where three water-colours and
four photographs of the "Rye school" will let her down easily. My little
backwater is just off the highway from London to the Continent. I am
really quite near Dover, and it's absurd how also quite near Italy that
makes me feel. To get there without the interposition of the lumbering
London, or even, if need be, of the bristling Paris, seems so to
simplify the matter to the mind. And yet, I grieve to say that, in a
residence here of a year and a half, I have only been to patria nostra
once.... Good-bye, my dear Charles--I must catch my train. Fortunately I
am but three minutes from the station. Fortunately, also, you are not to
associate with this fact anything grimy or noisy or otherwise
suggestive of fever and fret. At Rye even the railway is quaint--or at
least its neighbours are.

Yours always affectionately,
HENRY JAMES.


January 13, 1900.

P.S. This should be a prescript rather than a postscript, my dear
Charles, to prepare you properly for the monstrosity of my having
dictated a letter to you so long ago and then kept it over unposted into
the next century--if next century it be! (They are fighting like cats
and dogs here as to where in our speck of time we are.) There has been a
method in my madness--my delay has not quite been, not wholly been, an
accident; though there _was_ at first that intervention. What happened
was that I had to dash off and catch a train before I had time to read
this over and enclose it; and that on the close of that adventure, which
lasted a couple of days and was full of distractions, I had in a still
more belated and precipitate way to rush up to London. These sheets,
meanwhile, languished in an unfrequented drawer into which, after
hurrying off, I had at random thrust them; and there they remained till
my return from London--which was not for nearly a fortnight. When I came
back here I brought down William and his wife, the former, at the time,
so off his balance as to give me almost nothing but _him_ to think
about; and it thereby befell that some days more elapsed before I
rediscovered my letter. Reading it over then, I had the feeling that it
gave a somewhat unduly emphasised account of W.; whereupon I said to
myself: "Since it has waited so long, I will keep it a while longer; so
as to be able to tell better things." That is just, then, what I have
done; and I am very glad, in consequence, to be able to tell them. Only
I am again (it seems a fate!--giving you a strangely false impression of
my normally quiet life) on the point of catching a train. I go with W.
and A., a short time hence, on--again!--to Dover--a very small and
convenient journey from this--to see them so far on their way to the
pursuit, for the rest of the winter, of southern sunshine. They will
cross the Channel to-morrow or next day and proceed as they find
convenient to Hyères--which, as he himself has written to you, you
doubtless already know. I do, at any rate, feel much more at ease about
him now. The sight of the good he can get even by sitting for a chance
hour or two, all muffled and hot-watered, in such sun, pale and hindered
sun, as a poor little English garden can give him in midwinter, quite
makes me feel that a real climate, the real thing, will do much toward
making him over. He needs it--though differently--even as a consumptive
does. And moreover he has become, these last weeks, much more fit to go
find it. Q.E.D. But this _shall_ be posted. Yours more than ever before,

H. J.




_To Edmund Gosse._


Lamb House, Rye.
January 1st, 1900.

My dear Gosse,

I much welcome your note and feel the need of exonerations--as to my own
notelessness. It was very good of you, staggering on this gruesome
threshold and meeting only new burdens, I fear (of correspondence,) as
its most immediate demonstration, to find a moment to waggle me so much
as a little finger. I was painfully conscious of my long silence--after
a charming book from you, never properly acknowledged, etc.; but I have
been living with very few odd moments or off-hours of leisure, and my
neglect of every one and everything is now past reparation. The presence
with me of my brother, sister-in-law and little niece has, with a
particular pressure of work, walled me in and condemned my
communications. My brother, for whom this snug and secure little nook
appears to have been soothing and sustaining, is better than when he
came, and I am proportionately less depressed; but I still go on tiptoe
and live from day to day. However, that way one does go on. They go,
probably, by the middle of the month, to the South of France--and a
right climate, a _real_ one, has presumably much to give him....

I never thanked you--en connaissance de cause--for M. Hewlett's Italian
_Novelle_: of so brilliant a cleverness and so much more developed a one
than his former book. They are wonderful for "go" and grace and general
ability, and would almost make me like the _genre_, if anything could.
But I so hunger and thirst, in this deluge of cheap romanticism and
chromolithographic archaics (babyish, puppyish, as evocation, all, it
seems to me,) for a note, a gleam of reflection of the life _we_ live,
of artistic or plastic intelligence of it, something one can say yes or
no to, as discrimination, perception, observation, rendering--that I am
really not a judge of the particular commodity at all: I am out of
patience with it and have it _par-dessus les oreilles_. What I don't
doubt of is the agility with which Hewlett does it. But oh Italy--the
Italy _of_ Italy! Basta!

May the glowering year clear its dark face for all of us before it has
done with us!... Vale. Good-night.

Yours always,
HENRY JAMES.




_To Mrs. Everard Cotes._

     This refers to Mrs. Cotes's novel, _His Honor and a Lady_, and to a
     suggestion that its manner in some way resembled his own.


Lamb House, Rye.
January 26th, 1900.

Dear Mrs. Cotes,

I grovel in the dust--so ashamed am I to have made no response to your
so generous bounty and to have left you unthanked and unhonoured. And
all the while I was (at once) so admiring your consummately clever book,
and so blushing to the heels and groaning to the skies over the daily
paralysis of my daily intention to make you some at least (if not
adequate) commonly courteous and approximately intelligible sign. And I
have absolutely no valid, no sound, excuse to make but that _I am like
that_!--I mean I am an abandonedly bad writer of letters and
acknowledger of kindnesses. I throw myself simply on my confirmed (in
old age) hatred of the unremunerated pen--from which one would think I
have a remunerated one!

Your book is extraordinarily keen and delicate and able. How can I tell
if it's "like me"? I don't know what "me" is like. I can't _see_ my own
tricks and arts, my own effect, from outside at all. I can only say that
if it _is_ like me, then I'm much more of a _gros monsieur_ than I ever
dreamed. We are neither of us dying of simplicity or common addition;
that's all I can make out; and we are both very intelligent and
observant and conscious that a work of art must make some small effort
to _be_ one; must sacrifice somehow and somewhere to the exquisite, or
be an asininity altogether. So we open the door to the Devil
himself--who is nothing but the sense of beauty, of mystery, of
relations, of appearances, of abysses of the whole--_and_ of EXPRESSION!
That's _all_ he is; and if he is our common parent I'm delighted to
welcome you as a sister and to be your brother. One or two things my
acute critical intelligence murmured to me as I read. I think your drama
lacks a little, _line_--bony structure and palpable, as it were, tense
cord--on which to string the pearls of detail. It's the frequent fault
of women's work--and _I_ like a rope (the rope of the _direction and
march of the subject_, the action) pulled, like a taut cable between a
steamer and a tug, from beginning to end. It lapses and lapses along a
trifle too liquidly--and is too _much_ conceived (I think) in
dialogue--I mean considering that it isn't conceived like a play.
Another reflection the Western idiot makes is that he is a little
tormented by the modern mixture (maddening medley of our cosmopolite
age) of your India (vast, pre-conceived and absently-present,) and your
subject not of Indian essence. The two things--elements--don't somehow
illustrate each other, and are juxtaposed only by the terrible
globe-shrinkage. But that's not _your_ fault--it's mine that I suffer
from it. Go on and go on--you are full of talent; of the sense of life
and the instinct of presentation; of wit and perception and resource.
Voilà.

It would be much more to the point to _talk_ of these things with you,
and some day, again, this must indeed be. But just now I am talking with
few--wintering, for many good reasons, in the excessive tranquillity of
this tiny, inarticulate country town, in which I have a house really
adapted to but the balmier half of the year. And there is nothing
cheerful to talk of. South Africa darkens all our sky here, and I gloom
and brood and have craven questions of "Finis Britanniae?" in solitude.
Your Indian vision at least keeps _that_ abjectness away from you. But
good-night. It's past midnight; my little heavy-headed and heavy-hearted
city sleeps; the stillness ministers to fresh flights of the morbid
fancy; and I am yours, dear Mrs. Cotes, most constantly,

HENRY JAMES.




_To A. F. de Navarro._


Lamb House, Rye.
April 1st, 1900.

My dear brave Don Tony and dear beautiful Doña Mary: (not that Tony
isn't beautiful too or that Mary isn't brave!) You are awfully
exclusive; you won't be written to if you can help it--or if _I_ can;
but wonderful as you individually and conjoinedly are, you must still
taste of the common cup--you must recognise that, after all, you are,
humanly, _exposed_--! Well, _this_ is all, at the worst, you are exposed
to: to my only scribbling at you, a little, for the pride of the thought
of you. A fellow has feelings, hang it--and the feelings _will_
overflow. I am a very sentient and affectionate, albeit out-of-the-way
and out-of-the-fashion person. I _like_ to add with my own clumsy
fingers a small knot to the silken cord that, for the starved romance of
my life, does, by God's blessing, happen to unite me to two or three of
my really decorative contemporaries. Besides, if you _will_ write such
enchanting letters! The communication that (a few days ago in London)
reached [me] from each of you, makes up for many grey things. Many
things _are_ grey, in a _blafard_ English March and moist English
club-chambers: (tell me not of the pains of Provence!) Without our
gifted Jon. close at hand I should have parted forever with my sense of
colour. However, I don't want simply to thank you for all the present,
the past and the future--I want also to say, right distinctly, that if
you _can_ conveniently send me a copy of _L'Aiglon_ you'll stick the
biggest feather yet in your cap of grace. I believe the book isn't yet
out--so I shall be as patient as I am attached. You couldn't do a more
charming thing--and nobody _but_ you could do as charming a one.--I hold
you both fast and am your fond and faithful old friend,

HENRY JAMES.

P.S. I send this to C.F. as you may have shifted. How delightful your
picture of the little time-beating boy! What a family!




_To W. D. Howells._

     _The Sense of the Past_, the first chapters of which were written
     at this time, was presently laid aside and not continued until the
     autumn of 1914. The other projected "tale of terror," referred to
     in this letter, was never carried out; there seems to be no
     indication of its subject.


Lamb House, Rye.
29th June, 1900.

My dear Howells,

I can't emulate your wonderful little cursive type on your delicate
little sheets--the combination of which seems to suggest that you
dictate, at so much an hour, to an Annisquam fairy; but I will do what I
can and make out to be intelligible to you even, over the joy it is,
ever and always, to hear from you. You say that had you not been writing
me the particular thing you were, you fear you wouldn't have been
writing at all; but it is a compliment I can better. I really believe
that if I weren't writing you this, on my side, I _should_ be writing
you something else. For I've been, of late, reading you again as
continuously as possible--the worst I mean by which is as continuously
as the book-sellers consent: and the result of "Ragged Lady," the
"Silver Journey," the "Pursuit of the Piano" and two or three other
things (none wrested from your inexorable hand, but paid for from scant
earnings) has been, ever so many times over, an impulse of reaction, of
an intensely cordial sort, directly _at_ you--all, alas, spending
itself, for sad and sore want of you, in the heavy air of this alien
clime and the solitude, here, of my unlettered life. I wrote to you to
Kittery Point--I think it was--something like a year ago, and my chief
occupation since then has been listening for the postman's knock. But
let me quickly add that I understand overwhelmingly well what you say of
the impossibility for you, at this time of day, of letters. God knows
they _are_ impossible--the great fatal, incurable, unpumpable leak of
one's poor sinking bark. Non ragioniam di lor--I understand all about
it; and it only adds to the pleasure with which, even on its personal
side, I greet your present communication.

This communication, let me, without a shred of coyness, instantly
declare, much interests and engages me--to the degree even that I think
I find myself prepared to post you on the spot a round, or a square,
Rather! I won't go through any simpering as to the goodness of your
"having thought of me"--nor even through any frank gaping (though there
might be, for my admiration and awe, plenty of that!) over the wonder of
your multiform activity and dauntlessly universal life. Basta that I
will write anything in life that anyone asks me in decency--and a
fortiori that you so gracefully ask. I can only feel it to be enough for
me that you have a hand in the affair, that you are giving a book
yourself and engaging yourself otherwise, and that I am in short in your
company. What I understand is that my little novel shall be of fifty
thousand (50,000) words, neither more, I take it, nor less; and that I
shall receive the sum mentioned in the prospectus "down," in advance of
royalties, on such delivery. (I shall probably in point of fact, in my
financial humility, prefer, when the time comes, to avail myself of the
alternative right mentioned in the prospectus--that of taking, instead
of a royalty, for the two years "lease," the larger sum formed by the
so-much-a-word aggregation. But that I shall be clear about when the
work is done; I only glance at this now as probable.) It so happens that
I can get at the book, I think, almost immediately and do it within the
next three or four months. You will therefore, unless you hear from me a
short time hence to the contrary, probably receive it well before
December. As for the absoluteness of the "order," I am willing to take
it as, practically, sufficiently absolute. If you shouldn't like it,
there is something else, definite enough, that I can do with it. What,
however, concerns me more than anything else is to take care that you
_shall_ like it. I tell myself that I am not afraid!

I brood with mingled elation and depression on your ingenious, your
really inspired, suggestion that I shall give you a ghost, and that my
ghost shall be "international." I say inspired because, singularly
enough, I set to work some months ago at an international ghost, and on
just this scale, 50,000 words; entertaining for a little the highest
hopes of him. He was to have been wonderful and beautiful; he was to
have been called (perhaps too metaphysically) "The Sense of the Past";
and he was to have been supplied to a certain Mr ---- who was then
approaching me--had then approached me.... The outstretched arm,
however, alas, was drawn in again, or lopped off, or otherwise paralysed
and negatived, and I was left with my little project--intrinsically, I
hasten to add, and most damnably difficult--on my hands.... It is very
possible, however, it is indeed most probable, that I should have broken
down in the attempt to do him this particular thing, and this particular
thing (divine, sublime, if I _could_ do it) is not, I think, what I
shall now attempt to nurse myself into a fallacious faith that I shall
be able to pull off for Howells and Clarke. The damnable _difficulty_ is
the reason; I have rarely been beaten by a subject, but I felt myself,
after upwards of a month's work, destined to be beaten by that one. This
will sufficiently hint to you how awfully good it is. But it would take
too long for me to tell you here, more vividly, just how and why; it
would, as well, to tell you, still more subtly and irresistibly, why
it's difficult. There it lies, and probably will always lie.

I'm not even sure that the international ghost is what will most bear
being worried out--though, again, in another particular, the
circumstances, combining with your coincident thought, seemed pointed by
the finger of providence. What ---- wanted was two Tales--both tales of
"terror" and making another duplex book like the "Two Magics."
Accordingly I had had (dreadful deed!) to puzzle out more or less a
second, a different piece of impudence of the same general type. But I
had only, when the project collapsed, caught hold of the tip of the tail
of this other monster--whom I now mention because his tail seemed to
show him as necessarily still more interesting than No. 1. If I can at
all recapture _him_, or anything like him, I will do my best to sit down
to him and "mount" him with due neatness. In short, I will do what I
can. If I can't be terrible, I shall nevertheless still try to be
international. The difficulties are that it's difficult to be terrible
save in the short piece and international save in the long. But trust
me. I add little more. This by itself will begin by alarming you as a
precipitate instalment of my responsive fury. I rejoice to think of you
as basking on your Indian shore. _This_ shore is as little Indian as
possible, and we have hitherto--for the season--had to combat every form
of inclemency. To-day, however, is so charming that, frankly, I wish you
were all planted in a row in the little old garden into which I look as
I write to you. Old as it is (a couple of hundred years) it wouldn't be
too old even for Mildred. But these thoughts undermine. The "country
scenes" in your books make me homesick for New England smells and even
sounds. Annisquam, for instance, is a smell as well as a sound. May it
continue sweet to you! Charles Norton and Sally were with me lately for
a day or two, and you were one of the first persons mentioned between
us. You were _the_ person mentioned most tenderly. It was strange and
pleasant and sad, and all sorts of other things, to see Charles again
after so many years. I found him utterly unchanged and remarkably young.
But I found myself, _with_ him, Methusalesque and alien! I shall write
you again when my subject condenses. I embrace you all and am yours, my
dear Howells, always,

HENRY JAMES.




_To W. D. Howells._

     The book already begun, and now "the greatest obsession of all," is
     evidently _The Ambassadors_.


_Dictated.
Read P.S. (Aug. 14th) first!_

Lamb House, Rye,
August 9, 1900.

My dear Howells,

I duly received and much pondered your second letter, charming and
vivid, from Annisquam; the one, I mean, in reply to mine dispatched
immediately on the receipt of your first. If I haven't since its arrival
written to you, this is because, precisely, I needed to work out my
question somewhat further first. My impulse was immediately to say that
I wanted to do my little stuff at any rate, and was willing therefore to
take any attendant risk, however, measured as the little stuff would be,
at the worst, a thing I should see my way to dispose of in another
manner. But the problem of the little stuff itself intrinsically worried
me--to the extent, I mean, of my not feeling thoroughly sure I might
make of it what I wanted and above all what your conditions of space
required. The thing was therefore to try and satisfy myself
practically--by threshing out my subject to as near an approach to
certainty as possible. This I have been doing with much intensity--but
with the result, I am sorry to say, of being still in the air. Let the
present accordingly pass for a provisional communication--not to leave
your last encompassed with too much silence. Lending myself as much as
possible to your suggestion of a little "tale of terror" that should be
also international, I took straight up again the idea I spoke to you of
having already, some months ago, tackled and, for various reasons, laid
aside. I have been attacking it again with intensity and on the basis of
a simplification that would make it easier, and have done for it, thus,
110 pages of type. The upshot of this, alas, however, is that though
this second start is, if I--or if _you_--like, magnificent, it seriously
confronts me with the element of _length_; showing me, I fear, but too
vividly, that, do what I will for compression, I shall not be able to
squeeze my subject into 50,000 words. It will make, even if it doesn't,
for difficulty, still beat me, 70,000 or 80,000--dreadful to say; and
that faces me as an excessive addition to the ingredient of "risk" we
speak of. On the other hand I am not sure that I can hope to substitute
for this particular affair _another_ affair of "terror" which will be
expressible in the 50,000; and that for an especial reason. This reason
is that, above all when one has done the thing, already, as I have
rather repeatedly, it is not easy to concoct a "ghost" of any freshness.
The want of ease is extremely marked, moreover, if the thing is to be
done on a certain scale of length. One might still toss off a spook or
two more if it were a question only of the "short-story" dimension; but
prolongation and extension constitute a strain which the merely
apparitional--discounted, also, as by my past dealings with it--doesn't
do enough to mitigate. The beauty of this notion of "The Sense of the
Past," of which I have again, as I tell you, been astride, is precisely
that it involves without the stale effect of the mere bloated bugaboo,
the presentation, for folk both in and out of the book, of such a sense
of gruesome malaise as can only--success being assumed--make the
fortune, in the "literary world," of every one concerned. I haven't, in
it, really (that is save in one very partial preliminary and expository
connection,) to make anything, or anybody, "appear" to anyone: what the
case involves is, awfully interestingly and thrillingly, that the
"central figure," the subject of the experience, has the terror of a
particular ground for feeling and fearing that _he himself_ is, or may
at any moment become, a producer, an object, of this (for you and me)
state of panic on the part of others. He lives in an air of _malaise_ as
to the malaise he may, woefully, more or less fatally, find himself
creating--and that, roughly speaking, is the essence of what I have
seen. It is less gross, much less _banal_ and exploded, than the dear
old familiar bugaboo; produces, I think, for the reader, an almost equal
funk--or at any rate an equal suspense and unrest; and carries with it,
as I have "fixed" it, a more truly curious and interesting
drama--especially a more human one. _But_, as I say, there are the
necessities of space, as to which I have a dread of deluding myself only
to find that by trying to blink them I shall be grossly "sold," or by
giving way to them shall positively spoil my form for your purpose. The
hitch is that the thing involves a devil of a sort of prologue or
preliminary action--interesting itself and indispensable for
lucidity--which impinges too considerably (for brevity) on the core of
the subject. My one chance is yet, I admit, to try to attack the same
(the subject) from still another quarter, at still another angle, that I
make out as a possible one and which may keep it squeezable and short.
If this experiment fails, I fear I shall have to "chuck" the
supernatural and the high fantastic. I have just finished, as it
happens, a fine flight (of eighty thousand words) _into_ the high
fantastic, which has rather depleted me, or at any rate affected me as
discharging my obligations in that quarter. But I believe I mentioned to
you in my last "The Sacred Fount"--this has been "sold" to Methuen here,
and by this time, probably, to somebody else in the U.S.--but, alas,
not to be serialized (as to which indeed it is inapt)--as to the title
of which kindly preserve silence. The _vraie vérité_, the fundamental
truth lurking behind all the rest, is furthermore, no doubt, that
preoccupied with half a dozen things of the altogether human order now
fermenting in my brain, I don't care for "terror" (terror, that is,
without "pity") so much as I otherwise might. This would seem to make it
simple for me to say to you: "Hang it, if I can't pull off my Monster on
_any_ terms, I'll just do for you a neat little _human_--and not the
less international--fifty-thousander consummately addressed to your more
cheerful department; do for you, in other words, an admirable short
novel of manners, thrilling too in its degree, but definitely ignoring
the bugaboo." Well, this I _don't_ positively despair of still
sufficiently overtaking myself to be able to think of. _That_ card one
has always, thank God, up one's sleeve, and the production of it is only
a question of a little shake of the arm. At the same time, here, to be
frank--and above all, you will say, in this communication, to be
interminable--that alternative is just a trifle compromised by the fact
that I've two or three things begun ever so beautifully in such a key
(and only awaiting the rush of the avid bidder!)--each affecting me with
its particular obsession, and one, the most started, affecting me with
the greatest obsession, for the time (till I can do it, work it off, get
it out of the way and fall with still-accumulated intensity upon the
_others_,) of all. But alas, if I don't say, bang off, that _this_ is
then the thing I will risk for you, it is because "this," like its
companions, isn't, any way I can fix it, workable as a fifty-thousander.
The scheme to which I am _now_ alluding is lovely--human, dramatic,
international, exquisitely "pure," exquisitely everything; only
absolutely condemned, from the germ up, to be workable in not less than
100,000 words. If 100,000 were what you had asked me for, I would fall
back upon it ("terror" failing) like a flash; and even send you, without
delay, a detailed Scenario of it that I drew up a year ago; beginning
then--a year ago--to _do_ the thing--immediately afterwards; and then
again pausing for reasons extraneous and economic.... It really
constitutes, at any rate, the work I intimately want actually to be
getting on with; and--if you are not overdone with the profusion of my
confidence--I dare say I best put my case by declaring that, if you
don't in another month or two hear from me either as a Terrorist or as a
Cheerful Internationalist, it will be that intrinsic difficulties will
in each case have mastered me; the difficulty in the one having been to
keep my Terror down by _any_ ingenuity to the 50,000; and the difficulty
in the _other_ form of Cheer than the above-mentioned obsessive
hundred-thousander. I only wish you wanted _him_. But I have now in all
probability a decent outlet for him.

Forgive my pouring into your lap this torrent of mingled uncertainties
and superfluities. The latter indeed they are properly not, if only as
showing you how our question does occupy me. I shall write you
again--however vividly I see you wince at the prospect of it. I have it
at heart not to fail to let you know how my alternatives settle
themselves. Please believe meanwhile in my very hearty thanks for your
intimation of what you might perhaps, your own quandary straightening
out, see your way to do for me. It is a kind of intimation that I find,
I confess, even at the worst, dazzling. All this, however, trips up my
response to your charming picture of your whereabouts and present
conditions--still discernible, in spite of the chill of years and
absence, to my eye, and eke to my ear, of memory. We have had here a
torrid, but not a wholly horrid, July; but are making it up with a brave
August, so far as we have got, of fires and floods and storms and
overcoats. Through everything, none the less, my purpose holds--my
genius, I may even say, absolutely thrives--and I am unbrokenly yours,

HENRY JAMES.


14th August.

P.S. The hand of Providence guided me, after finishing the preceding, to
which the present is postscriptal, to keep it over a few days instead of
posting it directly: so possible I thought it that I might have
something more definite to add--and I was a little nervous about the way
I had left our question. Behold then I _have_ then to add that I have
just received your letter of August 4--which so simplifies our situation
that this accompanying stuff becomes almost superfluous. But I have let
it go for the sake of the interest, the almost top-heavy mass of
response that it embodies. Let us put it then that all is for the moment
for the best in this worst of possible worlds; all the more that had I
not just now been writing you exactly as I am, I should probably--and
thanks, precisely, to the lapse of days--be stammering to you the
ungraceful truth that, after I wrote you, my tale of terror did, as I
was so more than half fearing, give way beneath me. It _has_, in short,
broken down for the present. I am laying it away on the shelf for the
sake of something that _is_ in it, but that I am now too embarrassed and
preoccupied to devote more time to pulling out. I really shouldn't
wonder if it be not still, in time and place, to make the world sit up;
but the curtain is dropped for the present. All thanks for your full and
prompt statement of how the scene has shifted for you. There is no harm
done, and I don't regard the three weeks spent on my renewed wrestle as
wasted--I have, within three or four days, rebounded from them with such
relief, vaulting into another saddle and counting, D.V., on a straighter
run. I have _two_ begun novels: which will give me plenty to do for the
present--they being of the type of the "serious" which I am too
delighted to see you speak of as lifting again ... its downtrodden head.
I mean, at any rate, I assure you, to lift _mine_! Your extremely,
touchingly kind offer to find moments of your precious time for
"handling" something I might send you is altogether too momentous for me
to let me fail of feeling almost ashamed that I haven't something--the
ghost or t'other stuff--in form, already, to enable me to respond to
your generosity "as meant." But heaven only knows what may happen yet!
For the moment, I must peg away at what I have in hand--biggish stuff, I
fear, in bulk and possible unserialisability, to saddle you withal. But
thanks, thanks thanks. Delighted to hear of one of your cold waves--the
newspapers here invidiously mentioning none but your hot. We have them
all, moreover, _réchauffées_, as soon as you have done with them; and we
are just sitting down to one now. I dictate you this in my shirtsleeves
and in a draught which fails of strength--chilling none of the pulses of
yours gratefully and affectionately,

HENRY JAMES.




_To W. E. Norris._


Lamb House, Rye,
September 26th, 1900.

My dear Norris,

Charming and "gracious" your letter, and welcome sign of your
restoration in more senses than one. Though I see you, alas, nowadays,
at such intervals, I feel this extremely individual little island to be
appreciably less its characteristic self when you are away from it, and
sensibly more so, and breathing the breath of relief, when it gets you
back and plumps you down with a fond "There!" on your high hilltop, a
beacon-like depository of traditions no one else so admirably embodies.
Your invitation to come and share for a few days your paradise with you
finds me, I am very sorry to say, in a hindered and helpless moment. I
am obliged to recognise the stern fact that I _can't_ leave home just
now. I have had a complicated and quite overwhelmed summer--agreeably,
interestingly, anxiously and worriedly, even; but inevitably and
logically--waves of family history, a real deluge, having rolled over my
bowed head and left me, as to the question of work, production, time,
ease and other matters, quite high and dry. I went on Saturday last to
Dover to see my sister-in-law off to the Continent--and as she took a
night boat had to stop there over Sunday, at the too-familiar (and too
other things) Lord Warden; after which I came back to bury (yes, bury!)
my precious, my admirable little Peter, whom I think you had met. (He
passed away on Sunday at St. Leonard's, fondly attended by the local
"canine specialist"--after three days of dreadful little dysentery.)
Thus is constituted the first moment of my being by myself for about
four months. It may last none too long, and is, already, to be tempered
by the palpable presence of Gosse from Saturday p.m. to Monday next.
So, with arrears untold, in every direction, with preoccupations but
just temporarily arranged, I feel that I absolutely _must_ sit close for
a good many weeks to come; in fact till the New Year--after which I
depart. I don't quite know what becomes of me then, but I don't,
distinctly, for a third year, hibernate here. My London rooms are as
probably as sordidly let for 1901 (though not to a certainty,) and it
will (my wretched fate--not _fat_--_fate_) depend more or less upon
that. My brother, ill, but thank God, better, wants me to come to Egypt
with him and his wife for 12 weeks--his health demanding it, but he only
going if I will accompany him. So the pistol is at my head. Will it
bring me down? I've a positive terror of it. The alternatives are Rome
(of which I've a still greater terror than of Egypt, for it's an equal
complication and less reward,) or De Vere Gardens, or a more squalid
perch in town if De V.G. are closed to me. The latter, the last-named,
doom is what I really want. If I should, clingingly, clutchingly, stick
to these shores, I might _then_, were it agreeable to you, be able to
put in three days of Underbank, which I've never seen in its tragic
winter mood. But these things are in the lap of the gods.


_Later, same night._

I broke off this a.m. to go over to Lydd, where I've had, all summer, a
friend in camp, and promised to pay him a visit. My amanuensis, who has
been taking at the Paris exhibition a week of joy refused to his
employer (and indeed wholly undesired by him--did your "slow" return
from Marienbad partly consist of the same?) comes back to-morrow, and my
friend's battalion departs on Saturday--so it was my one chance to
redeem my perpetually falsified vow. I went by train and bicycled
back--in the teeth of a gale now fully developed here and howling in my
old chimneys; which sounds the knell of this (to do it justice)
incomparable September. I don't quite know what Drury Lane military
drama effects I had counted on--but I trundled home with the depressed
sense of something that hadn't wholly come off (in the way of a romantic
appeal,) a dusty, scrubby plain in which dirty, baby soldiers pigged
about with nothing particular to do. However, I've performed my promise,
and I sit down to a pile of correspondence that, for many days past, has
refused visibly to shrink.... You excite, with your Scandinavian and
Austrian holidays and junketings, the envious amaze of poor motionless
and shillingless me. I've been thinking of appealing to your
"Suffrages," but I more and more feel that I could never afford you. My
watering place is Hastings, and my round tour is rounded by the
afternoon. But good-night; my servant has just deposited by my side the
glass of boiling water which constitutes his nightly admonition that
it's "high time" I went to bed--and constitutes my own inexpensive
emulation of Marienbad and Copenhagen--where I am sure Gosse drinks the
most exotic things. Please say to Miss Effie that I doubly regret having
to be deaf to any kind urgency of hers, and that I hope she will find
means to include me in some prayer for the conversion of the benighted.
But my hot water is cooling, and it takes me so long to let it gouge its
inward course that I will be first yours, my dear Norris, always--though
I'm afraid you will say always impracticably--

HENRY JAMES.




_To A. F. de Navarro._


     "The Place of the Thirty Peacocks" was H. J.'s name for the old
     moated house of Groombridge Place, near Tunbridge Wells, which he
     had visited some years before with Mr. de Navarro.

Lamb House, Rye.
November 13, 1900.

Dear and exquisite Tony,

I would deal death, or à peu près, to the man who should have said that
I would have delayed these too many days to acknowledge your beautiful
little letter from--or about--the Place of the Thirty Peacocks. Yet he,
low wretch, would have been, after all, in the secrets of Fate; he would
have foreseen me a good deal accablé with arrears, interruptions, a
deluge of proofsheets, a complexity of duties and distractions; he would
have heard in advance my ineffectual groans and even have pitied my
baffled efforts. These things have eventuated to-night in the
irresistible desire to chat with you by the fire before turning in. The
fire burns low, and the clock marks midnight: everything but the
quantity of combustion reminds me of those small nocturnal hours, two
years ago, when I was communing with you thus and the fire _didn't_ burn
low. You saved my life then, and my house, and all that was mine; and
for aught I know you are now saving us all again--from some other deadly
element. To-night it's _water_--or the absense of it; I don't quite
understand which. Something has happened to my water supply, through a
pulling-up of the street, though it doesn't yet quite appear whether I'm
to perish by thirst or by submersion. Here I sit as usual, at any rate,
holding on to you--also as usual--while the clock ticks in the
stillness.--I can't tell you how happily inspired I feel it to have been
of you to remember our erstwhile pilgrimage to the Maeterlinck house and
moat and peacocks and ladies--for that's how--as a moated Maeterlinck
matter--the whole impression of our old visit, yours and mine and Miss
Reubell's comes back to me. I rejoice that they are still _en place_,
and how glad they must have been to see _you_! Willingly would I too
taste again the sweet old impression--which your letter charmingly
expresses. But I seem to travel, to peregrinate, less and less--and I am
reduced to living on my past accumulations. I wish they were larger. But
I make the most of them. They include very closely you and _Mrs._ You.
To _them_ I do seem reduced with you. What with our so far separated
country settlements and present absence of a London common centre (save
the Bond St. corner of which J. S. is the pivot!) memories and sighs,
echoes and ghosts are our terms of intercourse. You oughtn't, you know,
to have driven in stakes in your merciless Midland. This southern shore,
twinkling and twittering, with a semi-foreign light, a kind of familiar
_wink_ in the air, would have favoured your health, your spirits, and
heaven knows your being here would have favoured mine. I breakfast all
these weeks, mostly, with my window open to the garden and a flood of
sunshine pouring in. It's really meridional. It would--Rye would--remind
you of Granada--more or less. But I hope, after Xmas, to be in town for
three or four months. You will surely pass and repass there. When I, at
intervals, go up, on some practical urgency, for three or four hours, I
always see the abysmal Jon. He usually has some news of you to give; and
when he hasn't it's not for want of--on my part--solemn invocation.
However, I must now solemnly invoke slumber. Good-night--good-morning. I
bless your house, its glorious mistress and its innocent heir.

Yours always and ever,
HENRY JAMES.




_To W. E. Norris._


Lamb House, Rye.
December 23rd, 1900.

My dear Norris,

I greatly desire that this shall not fail to convey you my sentiments on
this solemn Xmas morn; so I sit here planning and plotting, and making
well-meant _pattes de mouche_, to that genial end. A white sea-fog
closes us in (in which I've walked healthily, with my young niece, out
to the links--with the sense of being less of a golfist than ever;) the
clock ticks and the fire crackles during the period between tea and
dinner; the young niece aforesaid (my only companion this season of
mirth, with her parents abroad and a scant snatch of school holidays to
spend with me) sits near me immersed in _Redgauntlet_; so the moment
seems to lend itself to my letting off this signal in such a manner as
_may_, even in these troublous times (when my nerves are all gone and I
feel as if _anything_ shall easily happen,) catch your indulgent eye. I
feel as if I hadn't caught your eye, for all its indulgence, for a long
and weary time, and I daresay you won't gainsay my confession. May the
red glow of the Yuletide log diffuse itself at Underbank (with plenty of
fenders and fireguards and raking out at night,) in a good old jovial
manner. I think of you all on the Lincombes, &c, in these months, as a
very high-feeding, champagne-quaffing, orchid-arranging society; and my
gaze wanders a little wistfully toward you--away from my plain broth and
barley-water. I in fact, some three weeks ago, fled from that Spartan
diet up to town, hoping to be in the mood to remain there till Easter,
and the experience is still going on, with this week here inserted as a
picturesque parenthesis. I asked my young niece in the glow of last
August not to fail to spend her Xmas with me, as I then expected to be,
Promethean-like, on my rock; and I've returned to my rock not to leave
her in the lurch. And I find a niece does temper solitude....

London, at all events, seems to me, after long expatriation, rather
thrilling--all the more that I have the thrill, the quite anxious throb,
of a new little habitation--which makes, alas, the third that I am
actually master of! I've taken (with 34 De Vere Gardens still on my
hands, but blessedly let for another year to come, and _then_ to be
wriggled out of with heaven's help) a permanent room at a club (Reform,)
which seems to solve the problem of town on easy terms. They are let by
the year only, and one waits one's turn long--(for years;) but when mine
the other day came round I went it blind instead of letting it pass. One
has to furnish and do all one's self--but the results, and conditions,
generally, repay. My cell is spacious, southern, looking over Carlton
Gardens: and tranquil, utterly, and singularly well-serviced; and I find
I can work there--there being ample margin for a type-writer and its
priest, or even priestess. It all hung by _that_--but I think I am not
deceived; so I bear up. And the next time you come to perch at a
neighbouring establishment, I shall sweep down on you from my eyrie.
It's astonishing how remote, cumbrous and expensive it makes 34 De Vere
Gardens seem. Worse luck that that millstone still dangles gracefully
from my neck!...

I've now dined, and re-established my niece with the second volume of
_Redgauntlet_--besides plying her, at dessert, with delicacies brought
down, à son intention, from Fortnum & Mason; and thus with a good
conscience I prepare to close this and to sally forth into the sea-fog
to post it with my own hand--if it's to reach you at any congruous
moment. I yesterday dismissed a servant at an hour's notice--the house
of the Lamb scarce knew itself and felt like that of the Wolf--so that,
with reduced resources, I make myself generally useful. Besides, at
little, huddled, neighbourly Rye, even a white December sea-fog is a
cosy and convenient thing.

So good night and all blessings on your tropic home. May your table
groan with the memorials of friendship, and may Miss Effie's midnight
masses not make her late for breakfast and _her_ share of them--which is
a little even in these poor words from yours, my dear Norris, always,

HENRY JAMES.




_To A. F. de Navarro._


Lamb House, Rye.
December 29th, 1900.

Dear and splendid Tony!

They are all admirable and exquisite--for I seem to have received so
much from you that "all" is the only indication comprehensive enough. I
came down from ten days in town the other day to find _L'Aiglon_, and
within three or four the beautiful little pocket-diary has added itself
to that obligation. Dear and splendid Tony, let me not even (scarcely)
_speak_ of my obligations. That way lies prostration, the sense of deep
unworthyness (wrongly spelled--to show how unworthi I _am_:) the memory
and vision of a little library of Bond St. booklets that collectors
(toward the end of 1901) will cut each others' throats for: and what do
I know besides? I am more touched than I can say, in short, by your
fidelity in every particular. _L'Aiglon_, now that we at last have the
glittering text, has been a joy to me, of the finest kind, here by the
Xmas fireside. I haven't seen the thing done--and I don't hugely want
to: I so represent it to myself as I go. The talent, the effect, the
art, the mastery, the brilliancy, are all prodigious. The man really has
talent like an attack of smallpox--I mean it rages with as purple an
intensity, and might almost (one vainly feels as one reads) be
contagious. You have given me, by your admirable consideration, an
exquisite pleasure. I wish we could talk of these things: but we are
like the buckets in the well.... Make me a preliminary sign the first
time you pass. For the present good-night. My Xmas letters are still
mainly unwritten and they are many and much. I greet you and Mrs. Tony
very constantly: I wish you a big slice of the new century: and I am
yours ever so gratefully,

HENRY JAMES.




_To the Viscountess Wolseley._


Lamb House, Rye.
Dec. 29, 1900.

Dearest Lady Wolseley,

This is a very faint and meagre little word, addressed to you late of a
terrifically windy winter's night by an old friend who doesn't happen[B]
to be in very good physical case (only for the moment, thank goodness,
probably!) and yet who doesn't want the New Year to edge an hour nearer
before he has made you Both--made you all Three--a sign of affectionate
remembrance amounting to tenderness pure and simple. I wish there were a
benediction I could call down on your house and your associated life in
sufficiently immediate and visible form: you would then see it flutter
into your midst and perch upon your table even while you read these
lines. I have thought of you constantly these past weeks, and have only
not written to you from the fear of appearing to assume that your
retirement has been to you woeful or in any degree heart-breaking. I
couldn't congratulate you positively, on the event, and yet I hated to
_condole_, in the case of people so gallant and distinguished. So I have
been hovering about you in thought like an anxious mother armed, in the
evening air, with a shawl or extra wrap, for a pair of belated but
high-spirited children liable to feel a chill, but not quite venturing
to approach the young people and clap the article on their shoulders. I
have remained in short with my warm shawl on my hands, but if I were
near you I should clap it straight on your shoulders at the first
symptom of a shiver, and wrap it close round and tuck it thoroughly in.
Forgive this feeble image of the confirmed devotion I hold at your
service. To see you will be a joy and a relief--the next time I go up to
town: I mean if it so befalls that you are then in residence at the
Palace. I do go up on the 31st--Monday next--to stay till Easter: where
my address is 105 _Pall Mall, S. W._, and if you _should_ be at Hampton
Court the least sign from you would bring me begging for a cup of tea. I
hope, meanwhile, with all my heart, that these weeks spent in looking,
after so many years, Comparative Leisure in the face, have had somewhat
the effect of mitigating the austerity of that countenance. There are
opportunities always lurking in it--the opportunity, heaven-sent, in
Lord Wolseley's case--as I venture to think of it--of sitting down
again to the engaging Marlborough. But here I am talking as if you
wouldn't know what to do! Whatever you do, or don't, please believe,
both of you, in the great personal affection that prompts this and that
calls toward you, to the threshold of the New Year, every pleasant
possibility and all ease and honour and, so far as you will consent to
it, rest.

Yours, dear Lady Wolseley, always and ever, and more than ever,

HENRY JAMES.

[B] This to attenuate his feebleness of hand!




_To William James._


     The news had just arrived of the death of F. W. H. Myers at Rome,
     where William James was spending the winter.

Reform Club, Pall Mall, S. W.
Jan. 24, 1901.

My dear William,

A laggard in response you and Alice will indeed feel that I have become.
I've had for three or four days your so interesting and relieving letter
dictated to Alice at the hour of poor Myers's death, and though it
greatly eased me off (as to my fears that the whole thing would have
worn you out,) yet till this moment my hand has been stayed. I wrote you
very briefly, moreover, as soon as the papers here gave the news.
Blessed seems it to have been that everything round about Myers was so
sane and comfortable; the reasonableness and serenity of his wife and
children etc., not to speak of his own high philosophy, which it must
have been fine to see in operation. But I hope the sequel hasn't been
prolonged, and have been supposing that, by the necessary quick
departure of his "party," you will have been left independent again and
not too exhausted. We here, on our side, have been gathering close
round the poor old dying and dead Queen, and are plunged in universal
mourning tokens--which accounts for my black-edged paper. It has really
been, the event, most moving, interesting and picturesque. I have felt
_more_ moved, much, than I should have expected (such is _community_ of
sentiment,) and one has realized all sorts of things about the brave old
woman's beneficent duration and holding-together virtue. The thing has
been journalistically overdone, of course--greatly; but the people have
appeared to advantage--serious and sincere and decent--_really_ caring.
Meanwhile the drama of the accession, new reign, &c., has its lively
spectacular interest--even with the P. of W. for hero. I dined last
night in company with some Privy Councillors who had met him
ceremonially, in the a.m., and they said (John Morley in particular
said) that he made a very good impression. Speriamo!

I find London answering very well, but with so much more crowdedness on
one's hours and minutes than in the country that I shall be glad indeed
when the end comes. Meanwhile, however, work proceeds.... The war has
_doubled_ the income tax here; it is hideous.

Ever tenderly your
HENRY.




_To Miss Muir Mackenzie._


     Miss Muir Mackenzie, during a recent visit to Rye, had been
     nominated "Hereditary Grand Governess" of the garden of Lamb House,
     and is addressed accordingly.

Lamb House, Rye.
June 15th, 1901.

Dear Grand Governess,

You are grand indeed, and no mistake, and we are bathed in gratitude for
what you have done for us, and, in general, for all your comfort,
support and illumination. We cling to you; we will walk but by your
wisdom and live in your light; we cherish and inscribe on our precious
records every word that drops from you, and we have begun by taking up
your delightful tobacco-leaves with pious and reverent hands and
consigning them to the lap of earth (in the big vague blank
unimaginative border with the lupines, etc.) exactly in the manner you
prescribe; where they have already done wonders toward peopling its
desolation. It is really most kind and beneficent of you to have taken
this charming trouble for us. We acted, further, instantaneously on your
hint in respect to the poor formal fuchsias--sitting up in their hot
stuffy drawing-room with never so much as a curtain to draw over their
windows. We haled them forth on the spot, everyone, and we clapped them
(in thoughtful clusters) straight into the same capacious refuge or
omnium gatherum. Then, while the fury and the frenzy were upon us, we
did the same by the senseless stores of geranium (my poor little
22/-a-week-gardener's idée fixe!)--we enriched the boundless receptacle
with _them_ as well--in consequence of which it looks now quite sociable
and civilised. Your touch is magical, in short, and your influence
infinite. The little basket went immediately to its address, and George
Gammon (!!) my 22-shillinger, permitted himself much appreciation of
your humour on the little tin soldiers. That regiment, I see, will be
more sparingly recruited in future. The total effect of all this, and of
your discreet and benevolent glance at my ineffective economy, is to
make me feel it fifty times a pity, a shame, a crime, that, as John
Gilpin said to his wife "you should dine at Edmonton, and I should dine
at Ware!"--that you should bloom at Effingham and I should fade at Rye!
Your real place is _here_--where I would instantly ask your leave to
farm myself out to you. I want to _be_ farmed; I am utterly unfit to
farm myself; and I do it, all round, for (seeing, alas, what it is) not
nearly little enough money. Therefore you ought to be over the wall and
"march" with me, as you say in Scotland. However, even as it is, your
mere "look round" makes for salvation. I am, I rejoice to say, clothed
and in my right mind--compared with what I was when you left me; and so
shall go on, I trust, for a year and a day. I have been alone--but next
week bristles with possibilities--two men at the beginning, two women
(postponed--the Americans) in the middle--and madness, possibly, at the
end. I shall have to move over to Winchelsea! But while my reason abides
I shall not cease to thank you for your truly generous and ministering
visit and for everything that is yours. Which _I_ am, very faithfully
and gratefully,

HENRY JAMES.




_To W. D. Howells._


     Strether's outburst to little Bilham, in Book V. of _The
     Ambassadors_, during their colloquy in the Parisian garden,
     represents the germ from which the novel sprang, and which H. J.
     owed, as he here tells, to Mr. Howells. The development of the
     subject from this origin is described in the preface afterwards
     written for the book.

Lamb House, Rye.
August 10th, 1901.

My dear Howells,

Ever since receiving and reading your elegant volume of short tales--the
arrival of which from you was affecting and delightful to me--I've meant
to write to you, but the wish has struggled in vain with the daily
distractions of a tolerably busy summer. I should blush, however, if the
season were to melt away without my greeting and thanking you. I read
your book with joy and found in it recalls from far far away--stray
echoes and scents as from another, the American, the prehistoric
existence. The thing that most took me was that entitled A Difficult
Case, which I found beautiful and admirable, ever so true and ever so
_done_. But I fear I more, almost, than anything else, lost myself in
mere envy of your freedom to do, and, speaking vulgarly, to place,
things of that particular and so agreeable dimension--I mean the
dimension of most of the stories in the volume. It is sternly enjoined
upon one here (where an agent-man does what he can for me) that
everything--every hundred--above 6 or 7 thousand words is fatal to
"placing"; so that I do them of that length, with great care, art and
time (much reboiling,) and then, even then, can scarcely get them worked
off--published even when they've been accepted.... So that (though I
don't know why I inflict on you these sordid groans--except that I
haven't any one else to inflict them on--and the mere affront--of being
unused so inordinately long--is almost intolerable) I don't feel incited
in that direction. Fortunately, however, I am otherwise immersed. I
lately finished a tolerably long novel, and I've written a third of
another--with still another begun and two or three more subjects
awaiting me thereafter like carriages drawn up at the door and horses
champing their bits. And àpropos of the first named of these, which is
in the hands of the Harpers, I have it on my conscience to let you know
that the idea of the fiction in question had its earliest origin in a
circumstance mentioned to me--years ago--in respect to no less a person
than yourself. At Torquay, once, our young friend Jon. Sturges came down
to spend some days near me, and, lately from Paris, repeated to me five
words you had said to him one day on his meeting you during a call at
Whistler's. I thought the words charming--you have probably quite
forgotten them; and the whole incident suggestive--so far as it was an
incident; and, more than this, they presently caused me to see in them
the faint vague germ, the mere point of the _start_, of a subject. I
noted them, to that end, as I note everything; and years afterwards
(that is three or four) the subject sprang at me, one day, out of my
notebook. I don't know if it be good; at any rate it has been treated,
now, for whatever it is; and my point is that it had long before--it had
in the very act of striking me as a germ--got away from _you_ or from
anything like you! had become impersonal and independent. Nevertheless
your initials figure in my little note; and if you hadn't said the five
words to Jonathan he wouldn't have had them (most sympathetically and
interestingly) to relate, and I shouldn't have had them to work in my
imagination. The moral is that you are responsible for the whole
business. But I've had it, since the book was finished, much at heart to
tell you so. May you carry the burden bravely!--I hope you are on some
thymy promontory and that the winds of heaven blow upon you all--perhaps
in that simplified scene that you wrote to me from, with so gleaming a
New England evocation, last year. The summer has been wondrous again in
these islands--four or five months, from April 1st, of almost merciless
fine weather--a rainlessness absolute and without precedent. It has made
my hermitage, as a retreat, a blessing, and I have been able, thank
goodness, to work without breaks--other than those of prospective
readers' hearts.--It almost broke mine, the other day, by the way, to go
down into the New Forest (where he has taken a house) to see Godkin,
dear old stricken friend. He gave me, in a manner, news of you--told me
he had seen you lately.... I am lone here just now with my sweet niece
Peggy, but my brother and his wife are presently to be with me again for
fifteen days before sailing (31st) for the U.S. He is immensely better
in health, but he must take in sail hand over hand at home to remain so.
Stia bene, caro amico, anche Lei (my Lei is my joke!) Tell Mrs. Howells
and Mildred that I yearn toward them tenderly.

Yours always and ever,
HENRY JAMES.




_To Edmund Gosse._


Lamb House, Rye.
Sept. 16th [1901].

My dear Gosse,

I hurl this after you, there, for good luck, like the outworn shoe of
ancient usage. Even a very, very old shoe will take you properly over
Venice. I wrote a week ago to Mrs. Curtis about you, and you will
doubtless hear from her, beckoningly, in respect to the ever-so-amiable
Barbaro: an impression well worth your having. For the rest I commit you
both, paternally, to Brown, to whose friendly memory I beg you to recall
me. I wish I could assist at some of your raptures. _Go to see the
Tintoretto Crucifixion at San Cossiano_--or never more be officer of
mine. And, àpropos of master-pieces, read a thing called _Venice_ in a
thing called _Portraits of Places_ by a thing called H. J., if you can
get the book: I'm not sure if it's in Tauchnitz, but Mrs. Curtis may
have the same. Brown certainly won't, though J. A. Symonds, in the only
communication I ever got from him, told me he thought it the best image
of V. he had ever seen made. This is the first time in my life, I
believe, by the way, I ever indulged in any such--in _any_ fatuous
reference to a fruit of my pen. So there may be something in it. Drink
deep, both of you, and come home remorselessly intoxicated, and reeking
of the purple vine, to your poor old attached abstainer,

HENRY JAMES.




_To Miss Jessie Allen._


     The "hideous American episode" was the recent assassination of
     President McKinley, on which Mr. Roosevelt succeeded to the
     Presidency. The "heavenly mansion" was the Palazzo Barbaro
     (referred to in the preceding letter to Mr. Gosse), where H. J. had
     stayed in company with Miss Allen.

Lamb House, Rye.
September 19th, 1901.

Dear bountiful and beautiful lady!

It is equally impossible to respond to you adequately and not to respond
to you somehow. You flash your many-coloured lantern, over my small grey
surface, from every corner of these islands, and I sit blinking, gaping,
clapping my hands, at the purple and orange tints to such a tune that
I've scarce presence of mind left for an articulate "Thank you." How you
keep it up, and how exactly you lead the life that, long years ago, when
I was young, I used to believe a very, very few fantastically happy
mortals on earth _could_ lead, and could survive the bliss of
leading--the waltz-like, rhythmic rotation from great country-house to
great country-house, to the sound of perpetual music and the acclamation
of the "house-parties" that gather to await you. You are the dream come
true--you really do it, and I get the side-wind of the fairy-tale--which
is more than I can really quite believe of myself--such a
living--almost--_near_ the rose! You make me feel near, at any rate,
when you write me so kindly about the hideous American episode--almost
the worst feature of which is that I don't either like or trust the new
President, a dangerous and ominous Jingo--of whom the most hopeful thing
to say is that he may be rationalized by this sudden real
responsibility. _Speriamo_, as we used to say in the golden age, in the
heavenly mansion, along with the ministering angel, long, long ago. And
all thanks meanwhile for your sympathetic thought. It must indeed--the
base _success_ of the act--cause a sinking of the heart among the
potentates in circulation. One wonders, for instance, just now, who is
most nervous, the poor little Tsar for himself or M. Loubet for him. Let
us thank our stars that we are not travelling stars, I not even a
Loubet, nor you a Loubette, and that though we have many annoyances we
are probably not marked for the dagger of the assassin.

_20th, p.m._ I had to break off last night, and I resume--perhaps a
trifle precariously at this midnight hour of what is just no longer
Friday, but about to be Saturday. I have seen, as it were, my two
guests, and my tardy servants, to bed, and I put in again this illegible
little talk with (poor) you! It has been a more convivial 24 hours than
my general scheme of life often permits.... Such are the modest annals
of Lamb House--or rather its daily and nightly chronicle. But don't let
it depress you--for everything passes, and I bow my head to the
whirlwind. But I hate the care of even a tiny and twopenny house and
wish I could farm out the same. If some one would only undertake it--and
the backgarden--at so much a year I would close with the offer and ask
no questions. I may still have to try Whiteley. But I shall try a winter
in town first. I blush for my meagreness of response to all your social
lights and shadows, your rich record of adventures.... But it's now--as
usual over my letters--tomorrow a.m. (I mean 1 a.m.) and I am, dear Miss
Allen, very undecipherably but constantly yours,

HENRY JAMES.




_To Mrs. W. K. Clifford._


Lamb House, Rye.
Wednesday night.
[Oct. 3, 1901.]

Dearest Lucy C.

I have waited to welcome you, to thank you for your dear and brilliant
Vienna letter, because you stayed my hand (therein) from writing--for
want of an address; and because I've believed that not till now (if even
now) would you be disengaged from the tangled skein of your adventures.
And even at this hour (of loud-ticking midnight stillness,) I don't
pretend to do more than greet you affectionately on the threshold of
home; promise you a better equivalent (for your so interesting, so
envy-squeezing, so vivid record of adventure) at some very near date;
and, above all, renew my jubilation at your having made so good and
brave a thing of it all--especially as _full_ and unstinted a one as you
desired. Never mind the money, I handsomely say--you will get it all
back and much more--in the refreshment and renewal and general
intellectual ventilation your six weeks will have been to you. I'm sure
the effect will go far--I want details so much that I wish I were to see
you soon--but, alas, I don't quite see when. I'm just emerging from a
domestic cyclone that has, in one way and another, cost me so much time,
that, pressed as I am with a woefully backward book, I can only for the
present hug my writing-table with convulsive knees. The figure doesn't
fit--but the postponement of all joy, alas, does. My two old
man-and-wife servants (who had been with me sixteen years) were, a few
days ago, shot into space (thank heaven at last!) by a whirlwind of but
48 hours duration; and though the absolute rupture came and went in
that time, the horrid accompaniments and upheaved neighbourhoods have
represented a woeful interruption. But it's over, and I have plunged
again (and am living, blissfully, for the present, with a house-maid and
a charwoman, and immensely enjoying my simplified state and my relief
from what I see now was a long nightmare).

I read your play in the Nineteenth Century, as you invited me, but I
can't _write_ of it now beyond saying that I was greatly struck by the
care and finish you had given it. If I must tell you categorically,
however, I don't think it a scenic subject _at all_; I think it bears
all the mark of a subject selected for a tale and done as a play as an
after-thought. I don't see, that is, what the scenic form does, or _can_
do, for it, that the narrative couldn't do better--or what it, in turn,
does for the scenic form. The inwardness is a kind of inwardness that
doesn't become an outwardness--effectively--theatrically; and the part
played in the whole by the painting of the portrait seems to me the kind
of thing for which the play is a non-conductor. And here I am _douching_
you on your doorstep with cold water. We must _talk_, we must colloquise
and compare and _renew_ the first moment we can, and I am all the while
and ever your affectionate old friend,

HENRY JAMES.




_To Miss Muir Mackenzie._


Lamb House, Rye.
Wednesday night. [Oct. 17, 1901].

Dear Miss Muir Mackenzie,

One almost infallibly begins--at least the perpetually criminal _I_
do--with the assurance that one has, from long since, been on the
point--! And it remains eternally true; which makes no difference,
however, in your being bored to hear it. Besides, if I _had_ been
writing a month ago I shouldn't, perhaps, be writing now; and that I
_am_ writing now is a present joy to me--which I would barter for none
other, no mere luxury of conscience. I haven't, for weeks, strolled
through my now blighted and stricken _jardinet_ without reverting
gratefully in thought to you as its titular directress; without wishing,
at once, that it were more worthy of you, and recognising, recalling
your hand and mind, in most of its least humiliating features. Your kind
visit, so scantly honoured, so meagrely recorded (I mean by
commemorative tablet, or other permanent demonstration,) lives again in
some of the faded phenomena of the scene--and the blush revives which
the sense of how poor a host I was caused even then to visit my cheek. I
want you in particular to know what a joy and pride your great proud and
pink tobacco-present has proved. It has overlorded the confused and
miscellaneous border in which your masterly eye recognised its
imperative--not to say imperial--place, and it has reduced by its mere
personal success all the incoherence around it to comparative
insignificance. What a bliss, what a daily excitement, all summer, to
see it grow by leaps and bounds and to feel it happy and hearty--as much
as it could be in its strange exile and inferior company. It has all
prospered--though some a little smothered by more vulgar neighbours; and
the tallest of the brotherhood are still as handsome as ever, with a
particular shade of watered wine-colour in the flower that I much
delight in. And yet--niny that I am!--I don't know what to do with them
for next year. My gardener opines that we leave them, as your perennial
monument, just as they are. But I have vague glimmerings of conviction
that we cut them down to a mere small protrusion above ground--and we
probably both are fully wrong. Or do we extract precious seed and plant
afresh? Forgive my feeble (I repeat) flounderings. I feel as the dunce
of an infant school trying to babble Greek to Professor Jebb (or
suchlike.) I am none the less hoping that the garden will be less
dreadful and casual next year. We've ordered 105 roses--also divers
lilies--and made other vague dashes. Oh, you should be in controlling
permanence! Actually we are painfully preparing to become bulbous and
parti-coloured. One _must_ occupy the gardener. The grapes have been bad
(bless their preposterous little pretensions!) but the figs
unprecedently numerous. And so on, and so on. And it has been for me a
rather feverish and _accidenté_ summer; I mean through the constant
presence of family till a month ago, and through a prolonged domestic
upheaval ever since. I sit amid the ruins of a once happy household,
clutching a charwoman with one hand, and a knife-boy--from
Lilliput--with the other. A man and his wife, who had lived with me for
long, long years, and were (in spite of growing infirmities and the
darker and darker shadow of approaching doom) the mainstay of my
existence, were sacrificed to the just gods three or four weeks ago, and
I've picnicked (for very relief) ever since--making futile attempts at
reconstruction for which I have had no time, and yet which have consumed
so much of it that none has been left, as I began by hinting, for
correspondence. I've been up to London over it, and haunted Hastings,
and wired to friends, and almost appealed to the Grand Governess--only
deterred by the fear of hearing from her that it isn't her province. Yet
I did wonder if I couldn't lawfully work it in under kitchen-garden. No
matter; my fate closes round me again, and the first thing I think of
now when I wake up in the morning is that a "cook-housekeeper" in a
Gorringe (?) costume (?) is to arrive next week. I tremble at her. If
the worst comes to the worst I _shall_ make you responsible. I walked
over to Winchelsea this afternoon and returned, in darkness and wet, by
the far-off station and the merciful train--always re-weaving the legend
of your wet exile there. It blows, it rains, it rages to-night--for the
first time here for six months. I hope you haven't had again to eat
overmuch the bread of banishment. I haven't asked you for your
news--have only jabbered my own; but I believe you not unaware that this
is but a subtler art for extracting from you the whole of your
herbaceous (and other) history. May it have been mild and merciful.
Good-night--or, as usual, good-morning--I am going to bed, but it has
been for some time to-morrow. Yours, dear Miss Muir Mackenzie, very
gratefully and faithfully,

HENRY JAMES.




_To Edmund Gosse._


     The reference in the following is to W. E. Henley's provocative
     article in the _Pall Mall Magazine_ on Mr. Graham Balfour's
     recently published Life of Robert Louis Stevenson.

Lamb House, Rye.
November 20th, 1901.

My dear Gosse,

I have been very sorry to hear from you of renewed upsets on quitting
these walls--the same fate having, I remember, overtaken you most of the
other times you've been here. I trust it isn't the infection of the
walls themselves, nor of the _re_fection (so scant last time) enjoyed
within them. Is it some baleful effluence of your host? He will try and
exercise next time some potent counter-charm--and meanwhile he rejoices
that your devil is cast out.

All thanks for your so vivid news of the overflow of Henley's gall. Ça
ne pouvait manquer--ça _devait_ venir. I have sent for the article and
will write you when I've read it. I gather from you that it's really
rather a striking and lurid--and so far interesting case--of long
discomfortable jealousy and ranklement turned at last to posthumous (as
it were!) malignity, and making the man do, coram publico, his ugly act,
risking the dishonour for the assuagement. That _is_, on the part of a
favourite of the press etc., a remarkable "psychologic" incident--or
perhaps I'm talking in the air, from not having read the thing. I dare
say, moreover, at all events, that H. _did_ very seriously--I mean
sincerely--deplore all the graces that had crept into Louis's
writing--all the more that they had helped it so to be loved: he
honestly thinks that L. should have written like--well, like who but
Henley's self? But the whole business illustrates how life takes upon
itself to give us more true and consistent examples of human
unpleasantness than expectation could suggest--makes a given man, I
mean, live up to his ugliness. This one's whole attitude in respect to
these recent amiable commemorations of Louis--the having (I,
"self-conscious and alone") nothing to do with them, contained
singularly the promise of some positive aggression. I have, however,
this a.m., a letter from Graham Balfour (in answer to one I had written
him on reading his book,) in which, speaking of Henley's paper, he says
it's less bad than he expected. He apparently feared more. It's since
you were here, by the way, that I've read his record, in which, as to
its second volume, I found a good deal of fresh interest and charm. It
seems to me, the whole thing, very neatly and tactfully done for an
amateur, a non-expert. _But_, I see now that a really curious thing has
happened, a "case" occurred much more interesting than the _cas_ Henley.
Insistent publicity, so to speak, has done its work (I only knew it was
_doing_ it, but G. B.'s book's a settler,) and Louis, _qua_ artist, is
now, definitely, the victim thereof. That is, he has _superseded_,
personally, his books, and this last re-placement of himself so _en
scène_ (so largely by his own aid, too) has _killed_ the literary
baggage. Out of no mystery now do they issue, the creations in
question--and they couldn't afford to lose it. Louis himself never
understood that; he too publicly caressed and accounted for them--but I
needn't insist on what I mean. As I _see_ it, at all events, it's a
strange little evolution and all taking place here, quite compactly,
under one's nose.

I don't come up to town, alas, for more than a few necessary hours, till
I've finished my book, and that will be when God pleases. I pray for
early in January. But then I shall stay as long as ever I can. All
thanks for your news of Norris, to whom I shall write. I envy your
Venetian newses--but I myself have written for some. I rain good wishes
on your house and am yours always,

HENRY JAMES.




_To H. G. Wells._


Lamb House, Rye.
January 20th, 1902.

My dear Wells,

Don't, I beseech you, measure the interest I've taken in your brilliant
book (that is in the prior of the recent pair of them,) and don't
measure any other decency or humanity of mine (in relation to anything
that is yours,) by my late abominable and aggravated silence. You most
handsomely sent me _Anticipations_ when the volume appeared, and I was
not able immediately to read it; I was bothered and preoccupied with
many things, wished for a free mind and an attuned ear for it, so let it
wait till the right hour, knowing that neither you nor I would lose by
the process. The right hour came, and I gave myself up--utterly,
admirably up--to the charm; but the charm, on its side, left me so
spent, as it were, with saturation, that I had scarce pulled myself
round before the complications of Xmas set in, and the New Year's
flood--in respect to correspondence--was upon me; which I've been till
now buffeting and breasting. And then I was ashamed--and I'm ashamed
still. That is the penalty of vice--one's shame disqualifies one for the
company of virtue. Yet, all this latter time, I've taken the greatest
pleasure in my still throbbing and responding sense of the book.

I found it then, I assure you, extraordinarily and unceasingly
interesting. It's not that I haven't--hadn't--reserves and reactions,
but that the great source of interest never failed: which great source
was simply H. G. W. himself. You, really, come beautifully out of your
adventure, come out of it immensely augmented and extended, like a
belligerent who has annexed half-a-kingdom, with drums and trumpets and
banners all sounding and flying. And this is because the thing, in our
deadly day, is such a charming exhibition of complete freedom of mind.
That's what I enjoyed in it--your intellectual disencumberedness; very
interesting to behold as the direct fruit of training and observation. A
gallant show altogether--and a gallant temper and a gallant tone. For
the rest, you will be tired of hearing that, for vaticination, you, to
excess, simplify. Besides, the phrophet (see how I recklessly spell him,
to do him the greater honour!) _must_--I can't imagine a subtilizing
prophet. At any rate I don't make you a reproach of simplifying, for if
you hadn't I shouldn't have been able to understand you. But on the
other hand I think your reader asks himself too much "Where is _life_ in
all this, life as I feel it and know it?" Subject of your speculations
as it is, it is nevertheless too much left out. That comes partly from
your fortunate youth--it's a more limited mystery for you than for the
Methuselah who now addresses you. There's less of it with you to provide
for, and it's less a perturber of your reckoning. There are for instance
more kinds of people, I think, in the world--more irreducible
kinds--than your categories meet. However, your categories do you, none
the less, great honour, the greatest, worked out as they are; and I
quite agree that, as before hinted, if one wants more life, there is Mr.
Lewisham himself, of Spade House, exhaling it from every pore and in the
centre of the picture. That is the great thing: he _makes_, Mr. Lewisham
does, your heroic red-covered romance. It had to have a hero--and it has
an irresistible one. Such is my criticism. I can't go further. I can't
take you up in detail. I am under the charm. My world _is_, somehow,
other; but I can't produce it. Besides, I don't want to. You can, and
do, produce yours--so you've a right to talk. Finally, moreover, your
book is full of truth and wit and sanity--that's where I mean you come
out so well. I go to London next week for three months; but on my
return, in May, I should like well to see you. What a season you must
have had, with philosophy, poetry and the banker! I had a saddish letter
from Gissing--but rumours of better things for him (I mean reviving
powers) have come to me, I don't quite know how, since. Conrad haunts
Winchelsea, and Winchelsea (in discretion) haunts Rye. So foot it up,
and accept, at near one o'clock in the morning, the cordial good-night
and general benediction of yours, my dear Wells, more than ever,

HENRY JAMES.




_To Percy Lubbock._


Lamb House, Rye.
March 9th, 1902.

My dear Percy Lubbock,

I've been very uncivilly silent, but I've also been still more dismally
hindered--I mean ever since receiving your good note of Feb. 22d. It
found me wearily, drearily ill, in bed; such had been my state ever
since Jan. 29th, and it ceased to be my state only ten days ago--since
when I have sat feebly staring at a mountain of unanswered letters. I
did go to London, Jan. 27th, but was immediately stricken, and scrambled
back here to be more commodiously prostrate. I've had to stay and
recuperate. But I am infinitely better--only universally behind. Still,
it isn't too late, I hope, to tell you it would have given me extreme
pleasure to see you in town had everything been different. Also that I
congratulate you with all my heart on the great event of your young,
your first, your never to be surpassed or effaced, prime Italiänische
Reise. It's a great event (_the_ revelation) at any time of life, but
it's altogether immeasurable at _your_ lucky one. Yet there are things
to be said too. As that there would be no use whatever in my having
"told you what to do." There wouldn't be the remotest chance of your
doing it. The place, the time, the aspect, the colour of the light and
the inclination of Percy Lubbock, will already be making for you their
own law, or, better still, causing you to live generally lawless and
promiscuous. _Be_ promiscuous and incoherent and intelligent, absorbent,
happy: it's your great chance. Be further glad of every Italian vocable
you take to your heart, and help me to hope that our meeting over it all
is only moderately put off--when you'll have ever so interesting things
to tell to yours most truly,

HENRY JAMES.




_To Gaillard T. Lapsley._


Lamb House, Rye.
June 22nd, 1902.

My dear, dear Boy!

The penalty of shameful turpitude is that even reparation and contrition
are made almost impossible by the dimensions of the abyss that separates
the criminal from virtue. Or, more simply, the amount of explanation (of
my baseness) that I have felt myself saddled with toward you, has long
operated as a further and a fatal deterrent in respect to writing to you
at all. The burden of my shame has in short piled up my silence, and to
break that hideous spell I must now cast explanations to the winds--ere
they crush me altogether. I've had a rather blighted and broken
winter--a good deal of somewhat ominous unwellness, now happily (D.V.)
over-past. Under the effect of it _all_ my correspondence has gone to
pieces, and though I've managed to write two books I've done so mainly
by an economy of _moyens_ that has forbidden my answering even a note or
two. I've thought of you, dreamed of you, followed you, admired you, in
fine tenderly loved you: done everything accordingly but treat you
decently. But I'm all right in the long, the very long run, and your
admirably interesting and charming letter of ever so many months ago has
never ceased to be a joy and pride to me. Those emotions have just been
immeasureably quickened by something told me by my brave little cousin
Bay Emmet (the paintress)--viz. her having lately met you in New York
and heard on your lips words (à mon adresse) not of resentment or scorn,
but of divine magnanimity and gentleness. You appear to have spoken to
her "as if you still liked me," and I like you so much for that that the
vibration has started these stammering accents. I really write you these
words not from my peaceful hermitage by the southern sea, but from the
depths of the meretricious metropolis, which I've never known so
detestable as at this most tawdry of crises, and from which I hope to
escape in a day or two, utterly dodging the insane crush of the
Coronation. The place is vilely disfigured by league-long hoardings (for
spectators at £10 0. 0. a head,) and cheap and awful decorations, and
the dear old Abbey in particular smothered into the likeness of the
Earl's Court Exhibition--not to be distinguished from the Westminster
Aquarium, in fact, opposite. And then the crowds, the gregarious, gaping
millions, are appalling, and I fly, in fine, back to the Southern
Sea--on the shore of which I've spent almost all my time for almost a
year past. I've lately been dabbling a little, for compensation, in
town; but I find small doses of London now go further, for my
organisation, than they used.

B. Emmet tells me that you still sit aloft in California and I permit
myself to rejoice in it, in spite of some of the lurid lights projected
by your so vivid letter over the composition of that _milieu_. You tell
me things of awful suggestion--and in respect to which I would give
anything for more talk with you and more chance for question and answer.

_June 26th._ The foregoing, my dear Boy, though dated here, was written
in London--which means that in the confusion and distraction, the
present chaotic crash of things there, it was also interrupted. I had
been there for a snatch of but three or four days, and I rushed back
here, in horror and dismay (24 hours since), just _before_ the poor
King's collapse set the seal on the general gregarious madness. I had
"chucked" the Coronation, thank heaven, before the Coronation chucked
_me_, and this little russet and green corner, as so often before, has
been breathing balm and peace to me after the huge bear-garden. The
latter beggars description at the present moment--and must now do so
doubly while reeling under the smash of everything. I feel like a man
who has jumped, safe, from an express-train before a collision--and to
make really sure of my _not_ having broken my neck I take up again this
distempered scrawl to you. But I won't talk of all this dreary
pandemonium here--dreary _whatever_ the issue of the poor King's
illness; inasmuch as, either way, it can only mean more gregarious
madness, more league-long hoarding, more blocks of traffic and deluges
of dust and tons of newspaper verbiage. Amen!

What I didn't begin to say to you the other day was how interesting and
awful I found your picture of your seat of learning. I rejoice with all
my heart that it has attached you, for just "the likes of you" are what
must make a difference (by influence, by example, by civilization, by
revelation) in the strange mixture--or absence of mixture--of its
elements. I gather from you that its air is _all_ female, so to speak,
and that in this buoyant medium you triumphantly float. It must be very
wonderful and fearful and indescribable, all of it, lifelike indeed
though your sketch appears to me. I wish immensely I could see you, so
that we could get nearer, together, to everything. You come out most
summers--is there no chance of your doing so this year? I seem to infer
the sad contrary, from my little cousin's not having told me that you
mentioned anything of the sort to her. I have the sense of having seen
you odiously little last year--a blighted and distracted season. As I
read over at present your generous letter I feel a special horror and
dismay at having failed so long and so abominably to give you the
promised word of introduction to Fanny Stevenson. I enclose one
herewith--but I must tell you that I feel myself to be launching it
rather into the dark. That is, I have a fear that she is rather
changed--or rather exaggerated--with time, illness etc.--and that you
may find her somewhat aged, queer, eccentric etc. And I'm not sure I'm
possessed of her address. Only remember this--that _she_ (with all
deference to her) was never the person to have seen, it was R. L. S.
himself. But good-night. I haven't half responded to you, nor met
you--in your charming details; yet I _am_, none the less, my dear
Lapsley, very affectionately yours,

HENRY JAMES.




_To Mrs. Cadwalader Jones._


     Mrs. Jones, it will be understood, had sent him two of the books of
     her sister-in-law, Mrs. Wharton.

Lamb House, Rye.
August 20th, 1902.

_Dictated._

Dear and bountiful Lady,

My failure, during these few days, to thank you for everything has not
come from a want of appreciation of _anything_--or from a want of
gratitude, or lively remembrance, or fond hope; or, in short, from
anything but a quite calculating and canny view that I shall perhaps
come in, during your present episode, with a slightly greater effect of
direct support and encouragement than if I had come during the fever of
your late short interval in London. It seems to be "borne in" to me that
you may be feeling--là où vous êtes--a little lone and lorn, a little
alien and exotic; so that the voice of the compatriot, counsellor and
moderator, may fall upon your ears with an approach to sweetness. I am
sure, all the same, that you are in a situation of great and refreshing
novelty and of general picturesque interest. At your leisure you will
give me news of it, and I wish you meanwhile, as the best advice, to
drain it to the dregs and leave no element of it untasted.

_My_ situation has, en attendant, been made picturesque by the
successive arrivals of your different mementoes, each one of which has
done its little part to assuage my solitude and relieve my gloom.
Putting them in their order, Mrs. Wharton comes in an easy first; the
unspeakable Postum follows handsomely, and Protoplasm--by which I mean
Plasmon--pants far behind. How shall I thank you properly for these
prompt and valued missives? Postum _does_ taste like a ferociously mild
coffee--a coffee reduced to second childhood, the prattle of senility. I
hasten to add, however, that it accords thereby but the better with my
enfeebled powers of assimilation, and that I am taking it regular and
blessing your name for it. It interposes a little ease after the long
and unattenuated grimness of cocoa. Since Jackson was able to provide it
with so little delay, I feel I may count on him for blessed renewals.
But I shall never count on any one again for Plasmon, which is gruesome
and medicinal, or at all events an "acquired taste," which the rest of
my life will not be long enough to acquire.

Mrs. Wharton is another affair, and I take to her very kindly as regards
her diabolical little cleverness, the quantity of intention and
intelligence in her style, and her sharp eye for an interesting _kind_
of subject. I had read neither of these two volumes, and though the
"Valley" is, for significance of ability, several pegs above either, I
have extracted food for criticism from both. As criticism, in the nobler
sense of the word, is for me enjoyment, I've in other words much liked
them. Only they've made me again, as I hinted to you other things had,
want to get hold of the little lady and pump the pure essence of my
wisdom and experience into her. She _must_ be tethered in native
pastures, even if it reduces her to a back-yard in New York. If a work
of imagination, of fiction, interests me at all (and very few, alas,
do!) I always want to write it over in my own way, handle the subject
from my own sense of it. _That_ I always find a pleasure in, and I found
it extremely in the "Vanished Hand"--over which I should have liked, at
several points, to contend with her. But I can't speak more highly for
any book, or at least for my interest in any. I take liberties with the
greatest.

But you will say that in ticking out this amount of Remingtonese at you
I am taking a great liberty with _you_; or rather, of course, I know you
won't, since you gave me kind leave--for which I shamelessly bless
you.... Good-bye with innumerable good wishes. Please tell Miss Beatrix
that these are addressed equally to her, as in fact my whole letter is,
and that my liveliest interest attends her on her path.

Yours and hers always affectionately,
HENRY JAMES.




_To W. D. Howells._


Lamb House, Rye.
Sept. 12th, 1902.

_Dictated._

My dear Howells,

An inscrutable and untoward fate condemns me to strange
delinquencies--though it is no doubt the weakness of my nature as well
as the strength of the said treacherous principle that the "undone
vast," in my existence, lords it chronically and shamelessly over the
"petty done." It strikes me indeed both _as_ vast, and yet in a
monstrous way as petty too, that I should have joyed so in "_The
Kentons_," which you sent me, ever so kindly, more weeks ago than it
would be decent in me to count--should have eaten and drunk and dreamed
and thought of them as I did, should have sunk into them, in short, so
that they closed over my head like living waters and kept me down, down
in subaqueous prostration, and all the while should have remained, so
far as _you_ are concerned, brutishly and ungratefully dumb. I haven't
been otherwise dumb, I assure you--that is so far as they themselves are
concerned: there was a time when I talked of nothing and nobody else,
and I have scarcely even now come to the end of it. I think in fact it
is _because_ I have been so busy vaunting and proclaiming them, up and
down the more or less populated avenues of my life, that I have had no
time left for anything else. The avenue on which you live, worse luck,
is perversely out of my beat. Why, however, do I talk thus? I know too
well how _you_ know too well that letters, in the writing life, are the
last things that get themselves written. You see the way that this one
tries to manage it--which at least is better than no way. All the while,
at any rate, the impression of the book remains, and I have infinitely
pleased myself, even in my shame, with thinking of the pleasure that
must have come to yourself from so acclaimed and attested a
demonstration of the freshness, within you still, of the spirit of
evocation. Delightful, in one's golden afternoon, and after many days
and many parturitions, to put forth thus a young, strong, living flower.
You have done nothing more true and complete, more thoroughly
homogeneous and hanging-together, without the faintest ghost of a false
note or a weak touch--all as sharply ciphered-up and tapped-out as the
"proof" of a prize scholar's sum on a slate. It is in short miraculously
felt and beautifully done, and the aged--by which I mean the
richly-matured--sposi _as_ done as if sposi were a new and fresh idea to
you. Of all your sposi they are, I think, the most penetrated and most
penetrating. I took in short true comfort in the whole manifestation,
the only bitterness in the cup being that it made me feel old. _I_ shall
never again so renew myself. But I want to hear from you that it has
really--the sense and the cheer of having done it--set you spinning
again with a quickened hum. When you mentioned to me, I think in your
last letter, that you had done the Kentons, you mentioned at the same
time the quasi-completion of something else. It is this thing I now
want--won't it soon be coming due?--and if you will magnanimously send
it to me I promise you to have, for it, better manners. Meanwhile, let
me add, I have directed the Scribners to send you a thing of my own, too
long-winded and minute a thing, but well-meaning, just put forth under
the name of _The Wings of the Dove_.

I hope the summer's end finds you still out of the streets, and that it
has all been a comfortable chapter. I hear of it from my brother as the
Great Cool Time, which makes for me a pleasant image, since I generally
seem to sear my eyeballs, from June to September, when I steal a glance,
across the sea, at the bright American picture. Here, of course, we have
been as grey and cold, as "braced" and rheumatic and uncomfortable as
you please. But that has little charm of novelty--though (not to
blaspheme) we _have_, since I've been living here, occasionally
perspired. I live here, as you see, still, and am by this time, like the
dyer's hand, subdued to what I work in, or at least try to economise in.
It is pleasant enough, for five or six months of the year, for me to
wish immensely that some crowning stroke of fortune may still take the
form of driving you over to see me before I fall to pieces. Apropos of
which I am forgetting what has been half my reason--no, not half--for
writing to you. Many weeks ago there began to be blown about the
world--from what fountain of lies proceeding I know not--a rumour that
you were staying with me here, a rumour flaunting its little hour as
large as life in some of the London papers. It brought me many notes of
inquiry, invitations to you, and other tributes to your glory--damn it!
(I don't mean damn your glory, but damn the wanton and worrying rumour).
Among other things it brought me a fattish letter addressed to you and
which I have been so beastly procrastinating as not to forward you till
now, when I post it with this. Its aspect somehow denotes insignificance
and impertinence, and I haven't wanted to do it, as a part of the so
grossly newspaperistic impudence, too much honour; besides, verily, the
intention day after day of writing you at the same time. Well, there it
all is. You will think my letter as long as my book. So I add only my
benediction, as ever, on your house, beginning with Mrs. Howells, going
straight through, and ramifying as far as you permit me.

Yours, my dear Howells, always and ever,
HENRY JAMES.




_To H. G. Wells._


Lamb House, Rye.
September 23rd, 1902.

My dear Wells,

All's well that ends well and everything is to hand. I thank you
heartily for the same, and I have read the _Two Men_, dangling
breathlessly at the tail of their tub while in the air and plying them
with indiscreet questions while out of it. It is, the whole thing,
stupendous, but do you know what the main effect of it was on my cheeky
consciousness? To make me sigh, on some such occasion, to _collaborate_
with you, to intervene in the interest of--well, I scarce know what to
call it: I must wait to find the right name when we meet. You can so
easily avenge yourself by collaborating with _me_! Our mixture would, I
think, be effective. I hope you are thinking of doing Mars--in some
detail. Let me in _there_, at the right moment--or in other words at an
early stage. I really shall, opportunity serving, venture to try to say
two or three things to you about the Two Men--or rather not so much
about them as about the cave of conceptions whence they issue. All I can
say now however is that the volume _goes_ like a bounding ball, that it
is 12.30 a.m., and that I am goodnightfully yours,

HENRY JAMES.




_To Mrs. Cadwalader Jones._


_Dictated._

Lamb House, Rye.
October 23d, 1902.

Dear Mrs. Cadwalader,

Both your liberal letters have reached me, and have given me, as the
missives of retreating friends never fail to do, an almost sinister
sense of the rate at which the rest of the world goes, moves, rushes,
voyages, railroads, passing from me through a hundred emotions and
adventures, and pulling up in strange habitats, while I sit in this
grassy corner artlessly thinking that the days are few and the
opportunities small (quite big enough for the likes of _me_ though the
latter be even here.) All of which means of course simply that you take
away my breath. But that was on the cards and it's not worth
mentioning. Your best news for me is of your being, for complete
convalescence, in the superlative hands you describe--to which I hope
you are already doing infinite credit. I kind of make you out, "down
there," I mean in the pretty, very pretty, as it used to be, New York
Autumn, and in the Washington Squareish region trodden by the steps of
my childhood, and I wonder if you ever kick the October leaves as you
walk in Fifth Avenue, as I can to this hour feel myself, hear myself,
positively _smell_ myself doing. But perhaps there are no leaves and no
trees now in Fifth Avenue--nothing but patriotic arches, Astor hotels
and Vanderbilt palaces. (My secretary was on the point of writing the
great name "aster"--which I think the most delightful irony of fate!
they are so flowerlike a race!) The October leaves are at any rate
gathering about me here--and that I have watched them fall, and lighted
my fire and trimmed my lamp, is about the only thing that has happened
to me--though I _should_ count in a visit from a delightful nephew, who
has just been with me for a fortnight, and left me for Geneva, where he
spends the winter.

I assisted dimly, through your discreet page, at your visit to Mrs.
Wharton, whose Lenox house must be a love, and I wish I could have been
less remotely concerned. In the way of those I know I hope you have by
this time, on your own side, gathered in John La Farge, and are not
allowing him to feel anything but that he is well and happy--except,
also, that I very affectionately remember him....

But I am not thanking you, all this time, for the interesting remarks
about the book I had last placed in your hands (The Wings of the Dove),
which you so heroically flung upon paper even on the heaving deep--a
feat to _me_ very prodigious. I won't say your criticism was eminent
for the time and place--I'll say, frankly, that it was eminent in
itself, and all full of suggestion. The fact is, however, that one is so
aware one's self, even to satiety, of the rights and wrongs of these
matters--especially of the wrongs--that freshness of mind almost fails
for discriminations, however benevolent, of others. Such is the price of
having written many books and lived many years. The thing in question
is, by a complicated accident which it would take too long to describe
to you, too inordinately drawn out, and too inordinately rubbed in. The
centre, moreover, isn't in the middle, or the middle, rather, isn't in
the centre, but ever so much too near the end, so that what was to come
after it is truncated. The book, in fine, has too big a head for its
body. I am trying, all the while, to write one with the opposite
disproportion--the body too big for its head. So I shall perhaps do if I
live to 150. Don't therefore undermine me by general remarks. And
dictating, please, has moreover nothing to do with it. The value of that
process for me is in its help to do over and over, for which it is
extremely adapted, and which is the only way I can do at all. It soon
enough, accordingly, becomes, _intellectually_, absolutely identical
with the act of writing--or has become so, after five years now, with
me; so that the difference is only material and illusory--only the
difference, that is, that I walk up and down: which is so much to the
good.--But I must stop walking now. I stand quite still to send my
hearty benediction to Miss Beatrix and I am yours and hers very
constantly,

HENRY JAMES.




_To H. G. Wells._


     The only two "effusions," of the kind described in this letter,
     that have survived are the preliminary schemes for the unfinished
     novels, _The Ivory Tower_ and _The Sense of the Past_, published
     with them in 1917.

Lamb House, Rye.
November 15th, 1902.

My dear Wells,

It is too horribly long that I have neglected an interesting (for I
can't say an interested) inquiry of yours--in your last note; and
neglected it precisely _because_ the acknowledgment involved had to be
an explanation. I have somehow, for the last month, not felt capable of
explanations, it being my infirmity that when "finishing a book" (and
that seems my chronic condition) my poor enfeebled cerebration becomes
incapable of the least extra effort, however slight and simple. My
correspondence then shrinks and shrinks--only the least explicit of my
letters get themselves approximately written. And somehow it has seemed
highly explicit to tell you that (in reply to your suggestive last)
those wondrous and copious preliminary statements (of my fictions that
are to be) don't really exist in any form in which they can be imparted.
I think I know to whom you allude as having seen their semblance--and
indeed their very substance; but in two exceptional (as it were) cases.
In these cases what was seen was the statement drawn up on the basis of
the serialization of the work--drawn up in one case with extreme detail
and at extreme length (in 20,000 words!) Pinker saw that: it referred to
a long novel, afterwards (this more than a year) written and finished,
but not yet, to my great inconvenience, published; but it went more
than two years ago to America, to the Harpers, and there remained and
has probably been destroyed. Were it here I would with pleasure transmit
it to you; for, though I say it who should not, it _was_, the statement,
full and vivid, I think, as a statement could be, of a subject as worked
out. Then Conrad saw a shorter one of the _Wings of the D._--also well
enough in its way, but only half as long and proportionately less
developed. _That_ had been prepared so that the book might be serialized
in another American periodical, but this wholly failed (what secrets and
shames I reveal to you!) and the thing (the book) was then written, the
subject treated, on a more free and independent scale. But _that_
synopsis too has been destroyed; it was returned from the U.S., but I
had then no occasion to preserve it. And evidently no fiction of mine
can or _will_ now be serialized; certainly I shall not again draw up
detailed and explicit plans for unconvinced and ungracious editors; so
that I fear I shall have nothing of that sort to show. A plan for
_myself_, as copious and developed as possible, I always do draw
up--that is the two documents I speak of were based upon, and extracted
from, such a preliminary _private_ outpouring. But this latter
voluminous effusion is, ever, so extremely familiar, confidential and
intimate--in the form of an interminable garrulous letter addressed to
my own fond fancy--that, though I always for easy reference, have it
carefully typed, it isn't a thing I would willingly expose to any eye
but my own. And even _then_, sometimes, I shrink! So there it is. I am
greatly touched by your respectful curiosity, but I haven't, you see,
anything coherent to produce. Let me promise however that if I ever do,
within any calculable time, address a manifesto to the dim editorial
mind, you shall certainly have the benefit of a copy. Candour compels me
to add that that consummation has now become unlikely. It is too
wantonly expensive a treat to them. In the first place they will none of
me, and in the second the relief, and greater intellectual dignity, so
to speak, of working on one's own scale, one's own line of continuity
and in one's own absolutely independent _tone_, is too precious to me to
be again forfeited. Pardon my too many words. I only add that I hope the
domestic heaven bends blue above you.

Yours, my dear Wells, always,
HENRY JAMES.




_To Mrs. Frank Mathews._


Lamb House, Rye.
November 18th, 1902.

My dear Mary,

You have made me a most beautiful and interesting present, and I thank
you heartily for the lavish liberality and trouble of the same. It
arrived this a.m. swathed like a mummy of the Pharaohs, and is a
monument to the care and skill of every one concerned. The photographer
has _retouched_ the impression rather too freely, especially the eyes
(if one could but keep their hands off!) but the image has a pleasing
ghostliness, as out of the far past, and affects me pathetically as if
it were of the dead--of one who died young and innocent. Well, so he
did, and I can speak of him or admire him, poor charming slightly
mawkish youth, quite as I would another. I remember (it now all comes
back to me) when (and where) I was so taken: at the age of _20_, though
I look younger, and at a time when I had had an accident (an injury to
my back,) and was rather sick and sorry. I look rather as if I wanted
propping up. But you have propped me up, now, handsomely for all time,
and I feel that I shall go down so to the remotest posterity. There is a
great Titian, you know, at the Louvre--_l'homme au gant_; but I, in my
gloved gentleness, shall run him close. All thanks again, then: you have
renewed my youth for me and diverted my antiquity and I really, as they
say, fancy myself, and am yours, my dear Mary, very constantly,

HENRY JAMES.




_To W. D. Howells._


Lamb House, Rye.
December 11th, 1902.

My dear Howells,

Nothing more delightful, or that has touched me more closely, even to
the spring of tears, has befallen me for years, literally, than to
receive your beautiful letter of Nov. 30th, so largely and liberally
anent _The W. of the D._ Every word of it goes to my heart and to
"thank" you for it seems a mere grimace. The same post brought me a
letter from dear John Hay, so that my measure has been full. I haven't
known anything about the American "notices," heaven save the mark! any
more than about those here (which I am told, however, have been
remarkably genial;) so that I have _not_ had the sense of confrontation
with a public more than usually childish--I mean had it in any special
way. I confess, however, that that is my chronic sense--the more than
usual childishness of publics: and it is (has been,) in my mind, long
since discounted, and my work definitely insists upon being independent
of such phantasms and on unfolding itself wholly from its own "innards."
Of course, in our conditions, doing anything decent is pure
disinterested, unsupported, unrewarded heroism; but that's in the day's
work. The _faculty of attention_ has utterly vanished from the general
anglo-saxon mind, extinguished at its source by the big blatant
_Bayadère_ of Journalism, of the newspaper and the _picture_ (above all)
magazine; who keeps screaming "Look at _me_, _I_ am the thing, and I
only, the thing that will keep you in relation with me _all the time_
without your having to attend _one minute_ of the time." If you are
moved to write anything anywhere about the _W. of the D._ do say
something of that--it so awfully wants saying. But we live in a lovely
age for literature or for any art but the mere visual. Illustrations,
loud simplifications and _grossissements_, the big building (good for
John,) the "mounted" play, the prose that is careful to be in the tone
of, and with the distinction of a newspaper or bill-poster
advertisement--these, and these only, meseems, "stand a chance." But why
do I talk of such chances? I am melted at your reading _en famille The
Sacred Fount_, which you will, I fear, have found chaff in the mouth and
which is one of several things of mine, in these last years, that have
paid the penalty of having been conceived only as the "short story" that
(alone, apparently) I could hope to work off somewhere (which I mainly
failed of,) and then _grew_ by a rank force of its own into something of
which the idea had, modestly, never been to be a book. That is
essentially the case with the _S. F._, planned, like The Spoils of
Poynton, What Maisie Knew, The Turn of the Screw, and various others, as
a story of the "8 to 10 thousand words"!! and then having accepted its
bookish necessity or destiny in consequence of becoming already, at the
start, 20,000, accepted it ruefully and blushingly, moreover, since,
_given the tenuity of the idea_, the larger quantity of treatment hadn't
been aimed at. I remember how I would have "chucked" _The Sacred Fount_
at the 15th thousand word, if in the first place I could have afforded
to "waste" 15,000, and if in the second I were not always ridden by a
superstitious terror of not finishing, for finishing's and for the
precedent's sake, what I have begun. I am a fair coward about
_dropping_, and the book in question, I fear, is, more than anything
else, a monument to that superstition. When, if it meets my eye, I say
to myself, "You know you might not have finished it," I make the remark
not in natural reproach, but, I confess, in craven relief.

But why am I thus grossly expatiative on the airy carpet of the bridal
altar? I spread it beneath Pilla's feet with affectionate jubilation and
gratification and stretch it out further, in the same spirit, beneath
yours and her mother's. I wish her and you, and the florally-minded
young man (he _must_ be a good 'un,) all joy in the connection. If he
stops short of gathering samphire it's a beautiful trade, and I trust he
will soon come back to claim the redemption of the maiden's vows. Please
say to her from me that I bless her--_hard_.

Your visit to Cambridge makes me yearn a little, and your watching over
it with C. N. and your sitting in it with Grace. Did the ghost of other
walks (I'm told Fresh Pond is no longer a Pond, or no longer Fresh, only
stale, or something) ever brush you with the hem of its soft shroud?
Haven't you lately published some volume of Literary Essays or Portraits
(_since_ the Heroines of Fiction) and won't you, munificently, send me
either that _or_ the Heroines--neither of which have sprung up in my
here so rustic path? I will send you in partial payment another book of
mine to be published on February 27th.

Good-night, with renewed benedictions on your house and your spirit.

Yours always and ever,
HENRY JAMES.




_To Madame Paul Bourget._


Lamb House, Rye.
January 5th, 1903.

Dear Madame Paul,

Very welcome, very delightful, to me your kind New Year's message, and
meeting a solicitude (for news of you both) which was as a shadow across
my (not very glowing indeed) Christmas hearth. Your note finds me still
incorrigibly rustic; I have been spending here the most solitary
Christmas-tide of my life (absolutely solitary) and I have not, for long
months, been further from home than for an occasional day or two in
London. I go there on the 10th to remain till May; but I am sorry to say
I see little hope of my being able to peregrinate to far Provence--all
benignant though your invitation be. We must meet--_some_ time!--again
in the loved _Italy_; but I blush, almost, to say it, when I have to say
at the same time that my present prospect of that bliss is of the
smallest. I long unspeakably to go back there--before I descend into the
dark deep tomb--for a _long_ visit (of upwards of a year); yet it proves
more difficult for me than it ought, or than it looks, and, in short, I
oughtn't to speak of it again save to announce it as definite.
Unfortunately I also want to return for a succession of months to the
land of my birth--also in anticipation of the tomb; and the one doesn't
help the other. Europe has ceased to be romantic to me, and my own
country, in the evening of my days, has become so; but this senile
passion too is perhaps condemned to remain platonic.--Bourget's
benevolence continues to shine on me, his generosity to descend, in the
form of heavenly-blue volumes, the grave smile of my dull library
shelves, for which I blush that I make so meagre returns. I shall send
you a volume in February, but it will have no such _grande allure_;
though the best thing in it will be a little story of which you gave me
long ago, at Torquay, the motive, and which I will mark. I congratulate
you on not being absentees from your high-walled--or much-walled--Eden,
and I hope it means a happy distillation for Bourget and much health and
peace for both of you. May you have a mild and merciful year! Deserve it
by continuing to have patience tous les deux with your very faithful
(and very inky) old friend,

HENRY JAMES.




_To Mrs. Waldo Story._


     The book to which the following refers is of course _William
     Wetmore Story and his Friends_, published in 1903.

_Dictated._

Lamb House, Rye.
Jan. 6th, 1903.

Dear Mrs. Waldo,

Let my first word be to ask you to pardon this vulgar machinery and this
portentous legibility: the fruit of dictation, in the first place (now
made absolutely necessary to me;) and the fruit, in the second place, of
the fact that, pegging away as I am at present, in your interest and
Waldo's (and with the end of our business now, I am happy to say, well
in sight), I so live, as it were, from day to day and from hour to hour,
by the aid of this mechanism, that it is an effort to me to break with
it even for my correspondence. I had promised myself to write you so
that you should receive my letter on the very Capo d'Anno; and if I had
_then_ overcome my scruple as to launching at you a dictated thing, you
would some time ere this have been in possession of my news. I have
delayed till now because I was every day hoping to catch the right
moment to address you a page or two of my own proper hieroglyphics. But
one's Christmas-tide burden (of writing) here is heavy; I didn't snatch
the moment; and _this_ is a brave precaution lest it should again elude
me; which, in the interest of lucidity, please again forgive.

So much as that about a minor matter. The more important one is that, as
you will both be glad to know, I have (in spite of a most damnable
interruption of several weeks, this autumn, a detested compulsion to
attend, for the time, to something else) got on so straight with the
Book that three quarters of it are practically written, and four or five
weeks more will see me, I calculate, at the end of the matter.... All
the material I received from you has been of course highly
useful--indispensable; yet, none the less, all of it put together was
not material for a Biography pure and simple. The subject itself didn't
lend itself to _that_, in the strict sense of the word: and I had to
make out, for myself, what my material _did_ lend itself to. I _have_, I
think, made out successfully and happily; if I haven't, at any rate, it
has not been for want of a great expenditure of zeal, pains, taste
(though I say it who shouldn't!) and talent! But the Book will, without
doubt, be an agreeable and, in a literary sense, really artistic and
honourable one. I shall not have made you all so patiently, amiably,
admirably wait so long for nothing.... I have looked at the picture, as
it were, given me by all your material, _as_ a picture--the image or
evocation, charming, heterogeneous, and a little ghostly, of a great
cluster of people, a society practically extinct, with Mr. and Mrs.
Story, naturally, all along, the centre, the pretext, so to speak, and
the _point d'appui_. This course was the only one open to me--it was
imposed with absolute logic. The Book was not makeable at all unless I
used the letters of other people, and the letters of other people were
useable with effect only so far as I could more or less evoke and
present the other people....

But I am writing you at hideous length--and crowding out all space for
matters more personal to ourselves. When once the Book is out I shall
want, I shall need, exceedingly, to see you all; and I don't think that,
unless some morbid madness settles on me, I shall fear to. But that is
arrangeable and shall be arranged.... My blessing on all of you.

Yours, dear Mrs. Waldo, most faithfully,
HENRY JAMES.




_To W. D. Howells._


     _The Ambassadors_ began at length to appear in the _North American
     Review_, January 1903, where it ran throughout the year.

_Dictated._

Lamb House, Rye.
Jan. 8th, 1903.

My dear Howells,

Let me beg you first of all not to be disconcerted by this chill
legibility. I want to write to you _to-day_, immediately, your
delightful letter of Dec. 29th having arrived this morning, and I can
only manage it by dictation as I am, in consequence of some obscure
indiscretion of diet yesterday, temporarily sick, sorry, and seedy; so
that I can only loll, rather listless (but already better of my poison),
in an armchair. My feelings don't permit me to wait to tell you that the
communication I have just had from you surpasses for pure unadulterated
charm any communication I have _ever_ received. I am really quite
overcome and weakened by your recital of the generous way in which you
threw yourself into the scale of the arrangement, touching my so long
unserialized serial, which is manifestly so excellent a thing for me. I
had begun to despair of anything, when, abruptly, this brightens the
view. For I _like_, extremely, the place the N.A.R. makes for my novel;
it meets quite my ideal in respect to that isolation and relief one has
always fondly conceived as the proper _due_ of one's productions, and
yet never, amid the promiscuous petticoats and other low company of the
usual magazine table-of-contents, seen them in the remotest degree
attended with. One had dreamed, in private fatuity, that one would
really be the better for "standing out" a little; but one had, to one's
own sense, never really "stood" at all, but simply lain very flat, for
the petticoats and all the foolish feet aforesaid to trample over with
the best conscience in the world. Charming to me also is the idea of
your own beneficent paper in the same quarter--the complete detachment
of which, however, from the current fiction itself I equally apprehend
and applaud: just as I see how the (not-to-be-qualified) editorial mind
would indulge one of its most characteristic impulses by suggesting a
connection. Never mind suggestions--and how you echo one of the most
sacred laws of my own effort toward wisdom in not caring to know the
source of _that_ one! I care to know nothing but that your relation to
my stuff, as it stands, gives me clear joy. Within a couple of days,
moreover, your three glorious volumes of illustrated prose have arrived
to enrich my existence, adorn my house and inflame my expectations. With
many things pressing upon me at this moment as preliminary to winding-up
here and betaking myself, till early in the summer, to London, my more
penetrative attention has not yet been free for them; but I am gathering
for the swoop. Please meanwhile be tenderly thanked for the massive and
magnificent character of the gift. What a glorious quantity of work it
brings home to me that you do! I feel like a hurdy-gurdy man listening
outside a cathedral to the volume of sound poured forth there by the
enthroned organist.... But good-night, my dear Howells, with every
feebly-breathed, but forcibly-felt good wish of yours always and ever,

HENRY JAMES.




_To William James._


     The special business that H. J. hints at in connexion with his
     projected visit to America was to be the arrangement for a
     collected edition of his works, a scheme that was now beginning to
     take shape. With regard to another allusion in this letter, it may
     be said that the threatened destruction of the old cottages, a few
     yards from Lamb House, was averted.

_Dictated._

Lamb House, Rye.
May 24th, 1903.

Dearest William,

How much I feel in arrears with you let this gross machinery
testify--which I shamelessly use to help to haul myself into line.
However, you have most beneficently, from of old, given me free licence
for it. Other benefits, unacknowledged as yet, have I continued to
receive from you: I think I've been silent even since _before_ your so
cheering (about yourself) letter from Ashville, followed, a few days
before I left town (which I did five days ago), by your still more
interesting and important one (of May 3d) in answer to mine dealing (so
tentatively!) with the question of my making plans, so far as
complicatedly and remotely possible, for going over to you for 6 or 8
months. There is--and there _was_ when I wrote--no conceivability of my
doing this for a year at least to come--before August 1904, at nearest;
but it kind of eases my mind to thresh the idea out sufficiently to have
a direction to _tend_ to meanwhile, and an aim to work at. It is in fact
a practical necessity for me, _dès maintenant_, to know whether or no I
absolutely want to go if, and when, I _can_: such a difference in many
ways (more than I need undertake to explain) do the prospect of going
and the prospect of _not_ going make. Luckily, for myself, I do already
(as I feel) quite adequately remain convinced that I _shall_ want to
whenever I can: that is [if] I don't put it off for much _more_ than a
year--after which period I certainly shall _lose_ the impulse to return
to my birth-place under the mere blight of incipient senile decay. If I
go at all I must go before I'm too old, and, above all, before I mind
being older. You are very dissuasive--even more than I expected; but I
think it comes from your understanding even less than I expected the
motives, considerations, advisabilities etc., that have gradually,
cumulatively, and under much study of the question, much carefully
invoked _light_ on it, been acting upon me. I won't undertake just now
to tell you what all these reasons are, and how they show to me--for
there is still plenty of time to do that. Only I _may_ even at present
say that I don't despair of bringing you round in the interval (if what
is beyond the interval _can_ realise itself) to a better perception of
my situation. It is, roughly--and you will perhaps think too
cryptically--speaking, a situation for which 6 or 8 months in my native
land shine before me as a very possible and profitable remedy: and I
don't speak _not_ by book. Simply and supinely to shrink--on mere
grounds of general fear and encouraged shockability--has to me all the
air of giving up, chucking away without a struggle, the one chance that
remains to me in life of anything that can be called a _movement_: my
one little ewe-lamb of possible exotic experience, such experience as
may convert itself, through the senses, through observation, imagination
and reflection now at their maturity, into vivid and solid _material_,
into a general renovation of one's too monotonised grab-bag. You speak
of the whole matter rather, it seems to me, "à votre aise"; you make,
comparatively, and have always made, so many movements; you have
travelled and gone to and fro--always comparatively!--so often and so
much. I have practically never travelled at all--having never been
economically able to; I've only gone, for short periods, a few times--so
much fewer than I've wanted--to Italy: never anywhere else that I've
seen every one about me here (who is, or was, anyone) perpetually making
for. These visions I've had, one by one, all to give up--Spain, Greece,
Sicily, any glimpse of the East, or in fact of anything; even to the
extent of rummaging about in France; even to the extent of trudging
about, a little, in Switzerland. Counting out my few dips into Italy,
there has been no time at which _any_ "abroad" was financially
convenient or possible. And now, more and more, all such adventures
present themselves in the light of mere agreeable _luxuries_, expensive
and supererogatory, inasmuch as not resolving themselves into new
material or assimilating with my little acquired stock, my accumulated
capital of (for convenience) "international" items and properties.
There's nothing to be done by me, any more, in the way of writing, _de
chic_, little worthless, superficial, _poncif_ articles about Spain,
Greece, or Egypt. They are the sort of thing that doesn't work in at all
to what now most interests me: which is human Anglo-Saxonism, with the
American extension, or opportunity for it, so far as it may be given me
still to work the same. If I _shouldn't_, in other words, bring off
going to the U.S., it would simply mean giving up, for the remainder of
my days, all chance of such experience as is represented by interesting
"travel"--and which in this special case of my own would be much more
than so represented (granting the travel to be American.) I should
settle down to a mere mean oscillation from here to London and from
London here--with nothing (to speak of) left, more, to happen to me in
life in the way of (the poetry of) motion. That spreads before me as for
mind, imagination, special, "professional" labour, a thin, starved,
lonely, defeated, beaten, prospect: in comparison with which your own
circumgyrations have been as the adventures of Marco Polo or H.M.
Stanley. I _should_ like to think of going once or twice more again, for
a sufficient number of months, to Italy, where I know my ground
sufficiently to be able to plan for such quiet work there as might be
needfully involved. But the day is past when I can "write" stories about
Italy with a mind otherwise pre-occupied. My native land, which time,
absence and change have, in a funny sort of way, made almost as romantic
to me as "Europe," in dreams or in my earlier time here, used to be--the
actual bristling (as fearfully bristling as you like) U.S.A. have the
merit and the precious property that they meet and fit into my
("creative") preoccupations; and that the period there which should
represent the poetry of motion, the one big taste of travel not
supremely missed, would carry with it also possibilities of the prose of
_production_ (that is of the production of prose) such as no other mere
bought, paid for, sceptically and half-heartedly worried-through
adventure, by land or sea, would be able to give me. My primary idea in
the matter is absolutely economic--and on a basis that I can't make
clear to you now, though I probably shall be able to later on if you
demand it: that is if you also are accessible to the impression of my
having _any_ "professional standing" là-bas big enough to be improved
on. I am not thinking (I'm sure) vaguely or blindly (but recognising
direct intimations) when I take for granted some such Chance as my
personal presence there _would_ conduce to improve: I don't mean by its
beauty or brilliancy, but simply by the benefit of my managing for once
in my life not to fail to be on the spot. Your allusion to an American
[agent] as all sufficient for any purpose I could entertain doesn't, for
me, begin to cover the ground--which is antecedent to that altogether.
It isn't in the least a question of my trying to make old copy-rights
pay better or look into arrangements actually existing; it's a
question--well, of too much more than I can go into the detail of now
(or, much rather, into the general and comprehensive truth of); or even
than I can ever do, so long as I only have from you Doubt. What you say
of the Eggs (!!!), of the Vocalisation, of the Shocks in general, and of
everything else, is utterly beside the mark--it being absolutely _for_
all that class of phenomena, and every other class, that I nurse my
infatuation. I want to see them, I want to see everything. I want to see
the Country (scarcely a bit New York and Boston, but intensely the
Middle and Far West and California and the South)--in _cadres_ as
complete, and immeasurably more mature than those of the celebrated
Taine when he went, early in the sixties, to Italy for six weeks, in
order to write his big book. Moreover, besides the general
"professional" I have thus a conception of, have really in definite
view, there hangs before me a very special other probability--which,
however, I must ask you to take on trust, if you can, as it would be a
mistake for me to bruit it at all abroad as yet. To make anything of
this last-mentioned business I must be on the spot--I mean not only to
carry the business out, of course, but to arrange in advance its
indispensable basis. It would be the last of follies for me to attempt
to do that from here--I should simply spoil my chance. So you see what
it all comes to, roughly stated--that the 6 or 8 months in question are
all I have to look to unless I give up the prospect of ever stirring
again. They are the only "stir" I shall ever be able to afford, because,
though they will cost something, cost even a good bit, they will bring
in a great deal more, in proportion, than they will cost. Anything else
(other than a mere repeated and too aridly Anglo-American winter in
Florence, perhaps, say) would almost only cost. But enough of all
this--I am saying, _have_ said, much more than I meant to say at the
present date. Let it, at any rate, simmer in your mind, if your mind
has any room for it, and take _time_, above all, if there is any danger
of your still replying adversely. Let me add this word more, however,
that I mention August 1904 very advisedly. If I want (and it's half the
battle) to go to the West and South, and even, dreamably, to Mexico, I
[could not] do these things during that part of the summer during which
(besides feeling, I fear, very ill from the heat) I should simply have
to sit still. On the other hand I should like immensely not to fail of
coming in for the _whole_ American autumn, and like hugely, in especial,
to arrive in time for the last three or four weeks of your stay in
Chocorua--which I suppose I should do if I quitted this by _about_
mid-August. Then I should have the music of _toute la lyre_, coming away
after, say, three or four Spring weeks at Washington, the next April or
May. But I _must_ stop. These castles in Spain all hang by the thread of
my finding myself in fact economically able, 14 months hence, to _face_
the music. If I am not, the whole thing must drop. All I can do
meanwhile is to try and arrange that I _shall_ be. I am scared,
rather--well in advance--by the vision of American expenses. But the
"special" possibility that shines before me has the virtue of covering
(potentially) all that. One thing is very certain--I shall not be able
to hoard by "staying" with people. This will be impossible to me (though
I _will_, assuredly, by a rich and rare exception, dedicate to you and
Alice as many days as you will take me in for, whether in country or
town.) Basta!

I talk of your having room in mind, but you must be having at the
present moment little enough for anything save your Emerson speech,
which you are perhaps now, for all I know, in the very act of
delivering. This morning's Times has, in its American despatch, an
account of the beginning, either imminent or actual, of the
Commemoration--and I suppose your speech is to be uttered at Concord.
Would to God I could sit there entranced by your accents--side by side,
I suppose, with the genial Bob! May you be floated grandly over your
cataract--by which I don't mean have any manner of fall, but only be a
Niagara of eloquence, all continuously, whether above or below the
rapids. You will send me, I devoutly hope, some report of the whole
thing. It affects me much even at this distance and in this so grossly
alien air--this overt dedication of dear old Emerson to his immortality.
I hope all the attendant circumstances will be graceful and beautiful. I
came back hither as I believe I have mentioned, some six days ago, after
some 18 weeks in London, which went, this time, very well, and were very
easy, on my present extremely convenient basis, to manage. The Spring
here, till within a week, has been backward and blighted; but Summer has
arrived at last with a beautiful jump, and Rye is quite adorable in its
outbreak of greenery and blossom. I never saw it more lovely than
yesterday, a supreme summer (early summer) Sunday. The dear little charm
of the place at such times consoles me for the sordid vandalisms that
are rapidly disfiguring and that I fear will soon quite destroy it.
Another scare for me just now is the threatened destruction of the two
little charmingly-antique silver-grey cottages on the right of the
little vista that stretches from my door to the church--the two that you
may remember just beyond my garden wall, and in one of which my gardener
has lately been living. They will be replaced, if destroyed, by a pair
of hideous cheap modern workingman's cottages--a horrid inhuman stab at
the very heart of old Rye. There is a chance it may be still
averted--but only just a bare chance. One would buy them, in a moment,
to save them and to save one's little prospect; but one is, naturally,
quite helpless for that, and the price asked is impudently outrageous,
quite of the blackmailing order. On the other hand, let me add, I'm
gradually consoling myself now for having been blackmailed in respect to
purchase of the neighbouring garden I wrote you of. Now that I have got
it and feel the value of the protection, my greater peace seems almost
worth the imposition. This, however, is all my news--except that I have
just acquired by purchase a very beautiful and valuable little Dachshund
pup of the "red" species, who has been promising to be the joy of my
life up to a few hours since--when he began to develop a mysterious and
increasing tumification of one side of his face, about which I must
immediately have advice. The things my dogs have, and the worries I have
in consequence! I already see this one settled beneath monumental
alabaster in the little cemetery in the angle of my garden, where he
will make the fifth. I have heard, most happily, from Billy at Marburg.
He seems to fall everywhere blessedly on his feet. But you will know as
much, and more, about him than I. I am already notching off the days
till I hope to have him here in August. I count on his then staying
through September. But good-bye, with every fond _vœu_. I delight in
the news of Aleck's free wild life--and also of Peggy's (which the
accounts of her festivities, feathers and frills, in a manner reproduce
for me.) Tender love to Alice. I embrace you all and am always yours,

HENRY JAMES.




_To Miss Violet Hunt._


_Dictated._

Lamb House, Rye.
Aug. 26th, 1903.

Dear Violet Hunt,

I am very backward with you, being in receipt of more than one
unanswered communication. Please set this down to many things; not least
my having, ever since you were here, been carrying on uninterruptedly a
small but crowded hotel.... I have still, all the same, to thank you for
the photographs of the admirable little niece, one of which, the one
with the hat, I retain, sending the other back to you if not by this
very post, then, at least, by the very next. Both are very pleasing, but
no photograph does much more than rather civilly extinguish the life and
bloom (so exquisite a thing) in a happy child's face. Also came the
Shakespeare-book back with your accompanying letter--for which also
thanks, but to which I can't now pretend to reply. You rebound lightly,
I judge, from any pressure exerted on you by the author--but _I_ don't
rebound: I am "a sort of" haunted by the conviction that the divine
William is the biggest and most successful fraud ever practised on a
patient world. The more I turn him round and round the more he so
affects me. But that is all--I am not pretending to treat the question
or to carry it any further. It bristles with difficulties, and I can
only express my general sense by saying that I find it _almost_ as
impossible to conceive that Bacon wrote the plays as to conceive that
the man from Stratford, as we know the man from Stratford, did.

For the rest, I have been trying to sit tight and get on with work that
has been much retarded, these two months, and much interrupted and
blighted.... I hope you will be able to give me, when we next meet, as
good an account of _your_ adventures and emotions. I have taken again
the liberty of this machinery with you, for having broken in your great
amiability I don't want to waste my advantage. Wherever you are _buon
divertimento_! I really hope for you that you are in town, which has
resources and defences against this execrable August that the bare bosom
of Nature, as we mainly know it here, sadly lacks.

Believe me yours always,
HENRY JAMES.




_To W. E. Norris._


Lamb House, Rye.
September 17th, 1903.

My dear Norris,

Your letter from the unpronounceable Japanese steamer is magnificent--so
magnificent, so appreciated and so _felt_, that it really almost has an
effect contrary to the case it incidentally urges--the effect of
undermining my due disposition to write to you! Your adventures by land
and sea, your commerce with the great globe, your grand imperial and
cosmic life, hover before me on your admirable page to make me ask what
you can possibly want of the small beer of any chronicle of mine. My
"beer," always, to my sense, of the smallest, sinks to positively
ignoble dregs in the presence of your splendid record--of which I think
also I am even moved to a certain humiliated jealousy. "All this and
heaven too?"--all this and letters from Lamb House, Rye, into the
bargain? That slightly sore sense has in fact been at the bottom of my
failure to write to you altogether--that and a wholly blank mind as to
where to address, catch or otherwise waylay you. Frankly, _really_, I
seemed to imagine you out of tune (very naturally and inevitably) with
_our_ dull lives and only saying to yourself that you would have quite
enough of them on getting back to them and finding them creep along as
tamely as ever. Let me hasten to add that I now rejoice to learn that
you have actually missed the sound of my voice, the scratch of my poor
pen, and I "sit down" as promptly, almost, as you enjoin, to prepare a
message which shall overtake you, or meet you somewhere. May it not have
failed of this before we (you sternly, I guiltily) are confronted! Your
appeal, scented with all the spices of the East and the airs of the
Antipodes, arrived in fact four or five days ago, and would have had my
more instant attention if the world, in these days, the small world of
my tiny point on the globe, were not inconveniently and oppressively
with me, making great holes in my all too precious, my all too hoarded
and shrunken treasure of Time. We have had an execrable, an infamous
summer of rain--endless rain and wild wintry tempest (the very worst of
my long lifetime;) but it has not in the least stayed the circulation of
my country-people (in particular,) and I have been running a small
crammed and wholly unlucrative hotel for their benefit, without
interruption, ever since I returned here from London the middle of May.
As I have to run it, socially and personally speaking, all unaided and
alone, I am always in the breach, and my fond dream of this place as a
little sheltered hermitage is exposed to rude shocks. I am just now, in
short, receiving a fresh shock every day, and the end is so far from
being in sight that the rest of this month and the replete form of
October loom before me as truly formidable. This once comparatively
quiet corner has, it is impossible to doubt, quite changed its
convenient little character since I first knew and adopted it, and has
become, for the portion of the year for which I most so prized it, a
vulgarly bustling rendezvous of indiscreet and inferior people. (I don't
so qualify my own visitors, poor dears--but the total effect of these
harried and haunted months, whereof the former golden air has been
turned to tinkling brass. It all makes me glad I am old, and thereby
soon to take leave of a world in which one is driven, unoffending, from
pillar to post.) You see I don't pretend to take up _your_ wondrous tale
or to treat you to responsive echoes and ejaculations. It will be
delightful to do so when we meet again and I can ask you face to face
the thousand questions that your story calls to my lips. Let me even now
and thus, however, congratulate you with all my heart on such a fine
bellyful of raw (and other) material as your so varied and populated
experience must have provided you withal. You have had to ingurgitate a
bigger dose of salt water than I should personally care for, and I don't
directly wish that _any_ of your opportunities should have been mine--so
wholly, with the lack of means to move, has the appetite for movement
abandoned my aged carcass. But I applaud and enjoy the sight of these
high energies in those who are capable and worthy of them, and
distinctly like to think that there are quasi-contemporaries of longer
wind (and purse,) and of stouter heart than mine--though I _am_ planning
at last to go to the U.S. (for the first time for 21 years) next summer,
and remain there some 6 or 8 months. (But there is time to talk of
this.).. Your letter is full of interesting things that I can, however,
send back to you no echo of--since if I do I shall still be writing it
when you get back, and you will come and look at it over my shoulder.
Interesting above all your hints of your convictions or impressions or
whatever, about the great colonial question and the great Joseph's
probable misadventure--as to which I find it utterly impossible to have
a competent opinion. I have nothing but an obscure and superstitious
sense that this country's "fiscal" attitude and faith has for the last
half century been _superior_ and distinguished, and that the change
proposed to her reeks, probably, with political and economical
vulgarity. But that way, just now, madness lies--you will find plenty of
it when you get back. As to the probable date of that event you give me
no hint, but I look forward to your return with an eager appetite for
your high exotic flavour, which please do everything further possible,
meanwhile, to intensify: unless indeed the final effort of everything
shall have been (as I shrewdly suspect) to make you more brutally
British. You will even then, anyway, be an exceedingly welcome
reappearance to yours always and ever,

HENRY JAMES.




_To Howard Sturgis._


     The proof-sheets in question were those of Mr. Sturgis's
     forthcoming novel, _Belchamber_.

Lamb House, Rye.
November 8th, 1903.

My dear Howard,

I send you back the blooming proofs with my thanks and with no marks or
comments at all. In the first place there are none, of the marginal
kind, to make, and in the second place it is too late to make them if
there were. The thing goes on very solidly and smoothly, interesting and
amusing as it moves, very well written, well felt, well composed, well
written perhaps in particular. I am a bad person, really, to expose
"fictitious work" to--I, as a battered producer and "technician" myself,
have long since inevitably ceased to read with _naïveté_; I can only
read critically, constructively, reconstructively, writing the thing
over (if I can swallow it at all) _my_ way, and looking at it, so to
speak, from within. But even thus I "pass" your book very--tenderly!
There is only one thing that, as a matter of detail, I am moved to
say--which is that I feel you have a great deal increased your
difficulty by screwing up the "social position" of all your people so
very high. When a man is an English Marquis, even a lame one, there are
whole masses of Marquisate things and items, a multitude of inherent
detail in his existence, which it isn't open to the painter _de gaieté
de cœur_ not to make some picture of. And yet if I mention this
because it is _the_ place where people will challenge you, and to
suggest to you therefore to expect it--if I do so I am probably after
all quite wrong. No one notices or understands _any_thing, and no one
will make a single intelligent or intelligible observation about your
work. They will make plenty of others. What I applaud is your sticking
to the real line and centre of your theme--the consciousness and view of
Sainty himself, and your dealing with things, with the whole
fantasmagoria, as presented to him only, not otherwise going behind
them.

And also I applaud, dearest Howard, your expression of attachment to him
who holds this pen (and passes it at this moment over very dirty paper:)
for he is extremely accessible to such demonstrations and touched by
them--more than ever in his lonely (more than) maturity. Keep it up as
hard as possible; continue to pass your hand into my arm and believe
that I always like greatly to feel it. We are two who can communicate
freely.

I send you back also Temple Bar, in which I have found your paper a
moving and charming thing, waking up the pathetic ghost only too
effectually. The ancient years and images that I too more or less
remember swarm up and vaguely moan round about one like Banshees or
other mystic and melancholy presences. It's _all_ a little mystic and
melancholy to me here when I am quite alone, as I more particularly am
after "grand" company has come and gone. You are essentially grand
company, and felt as such--and the subsidence is proportionally flat.
But I took a long walk with Max this grey still Sabbath afternoon--have
indeed taken one each day, and am possessed of means, thank goodness, to
make the desert (of being quite to myself) blossom like the rose.

Good-night--it's 12.30, the clock ticks loud and Max snoozes audibly in
the armchair I lately vacated.... Yours, my dear Howard always and ever,

HENRY JAMES.




_To Henry Adams._


     Henry Adams, the well-known American historian, was a friend of
     long standing. The following refers to H. J.'s recently published
     _W. W. Story and his Friends_.

Lamb House, Rye.
November 19, 1903.

My dear Adams,

I am so happy at hearing from you _at all_ that the sense of the
particular occasion of my doing so is almost submerged and smothered.
You did bravely well to write--make a note of the act, for your future
career, as belonging to a class of impulses to be precipitately obeyed,
and, if possible, even tenderly nursed. Yet it has been interesting,
exceedingly, in the narrower sense, as well as delightful in the larger,
to have your letter, with its ingenious expression of the effects on you
of poor _W. W. S._--with whom, and the whole business of whom, there is
(yes, I can see!) a kind of _inevitableness_ in my having made you
squirm--or whatever is the proper name for the sensation engendered in
you! Very curious, and even rather terrible, this so far-reaching action
of a little biographical vividness--which did indeed, in a manner, begin
with me, myself, even as I put the stuff together--though putting me to
conclusions less grim, as I may call them, than in your case. The truth
is that _any_ retraced story of bourgeois lives (lives other than great
lives of "action"--_et encore!_) throws a chill upon the scene, the
time, the subject, the small mapped-out facts, and if you find "great
men thin" it isn't really so much their fault (and least of all yours)
as that the art of the biographer--devilish art!--is somehow practically
_thinning_. It simplifies even while seeking to enrich--and even the
Immortal are so helpless and passive in death. The proof is that I
wanted to invest dull old Boston with a mellow, a golden glow--and that
for those who know, like yourself, I only make it bleak--and weak!
Luckily those who know are indeed but three or four--and they won't, I
hope, too promiscuously tell....

Yours, my dear Adams, always and ever,
HENRY JAMES.




_To Sir George O. Trevelyan._


     The second part of Sir George Trevelyan's _American Revolution_ had
     just appeared at this time.

Lamb House, Rye.
Nov. 25th, 1903.

Dear Sir George,

I should be a poor creature if I had read your two last volumes without
feeling the liveliest desire to write to you. That is the desire you
must have kindled indeed in more quarters than you will care to reckon
with; but even this reflection doesn't stay my pen, save to make me
parenthise that I should be absolutely distressed to receive from you
any acknowledgment of these few lines.

This new instalment of your admirable book has held me so tight, from
chapter to chapter, that it is as if I were hanging back from mere force
of appreciation, and yet I found myself, as I read, vibrating
responsively, in so many different ways, that my emotions carried me at
the same time all over the place. You of course know far better than I
how you have dealt with your material; but I doubt whether you know what
a work of civilization you are perpetrating internationally by the very
fact of your producing so exquisite a work of art. The American, the
Englishman, the artist, and the critic in me--to say nothing of the
friend!--all drink you down in a deep draught, each in turn feeling that
he is more deeply concerned. But it is of course, as with the other
volume, the book's being so richly and authoritatively English, so
validly true, and yet so projected as it were into the American
consciousness, that will help to build the bridge across the Atlantic;
and I think it is the mystery of this large fusion, carried out in so
many ways, that makes the thing so distinguished a work of art; yet who
shall say, so familiarly--when a thing is such a work of art--I mean who
shall say how it has, by a thousand roads, got itself made so?

It is this literary temperament of your work, this beautiful quality of
composition, and feeling of the presentation, grasping reality all the
while, and controlling and playing with the detail, it is this in our
chattering and slobbering day that gives me the sense of the ampler
tread and deeper voice of the man--in fact of his speaking in his own
voice at all, or moving with his own step. You will make my own country
people touch as with reverence the hem of his garment; but I think that
I most envy you your having such a method at all--your being able to see
so many facts and yet to see them each, imaged and related and lighted,
as a painter sees the objects, together, that are before his canvas.
They become, I mean, so amusingly concrete and individual for you; but
that is just the inscrutable luxury of your book; and you bring home
further, to me, at least, who had never so fully felt it, what a
difficult and precarious, and even might-not-have been, Revolution it
was, altogether, as a Revolution. Wasn't it as nearly as possible not
being that, whatever else it might have been? The Tail might in time
have taken to wagging the dog if the Tail could only, as seemed so easy,
have been left on! But I didn't mean to embark on these reflections. I
only wanted really to make you feel a little responsible for my being,
through living with you this succession of placid country evenings, far
from the London ravage, extravagantly agitated. But take your
responsibility philosophically; recall me to the kind consideration of
Lady Trevelyan, and believe me very constantly yours,

HENRY JAMES.
