RYE AND CHELSEA (1910-1914).



_To T. Bailey Saunders._


/*
L. H.

Jan. 27th [1910].
*/

/*
My dear Bailey,
*/

I am still in bed, attended by doctor and nurse, but doing very well and
mending _now_ very steadily and smoothly--so that I hope to be
practically up early next week. Also I am touched by, and appreciative
of, your solicitude. (You see I still cling to syntax or style, or
whatever it is.) But I have had an infernal time really--I may now
confide to you--pretty well all the while since I left you that sad and
sinister morning to come back from the station. A digestive crisis
making food loathsome and nutrition impossible--and sick inanition and
weakness and depression permanent. However, _bed_, the good Skinner,
M.D., the gentle nurse, with very small feedings administered every 2
hours, have got the better of the cursed state, and I am now hungry and
redeemed and convalescent. The Election fight has revealed to me how
ardent a Liberal lurks in the cold and clammy exterior of your

/*
H. J.
*/




_To Mrs. Wharton._

/#
     The allusions in the following are to articles by Mr. W. Morton
     Fullerton (in the _Times_) on the disastrous floods in Paris, and
     to Alfred de Musset's "Lettres d'amour à Aimée d'Alton."
#/


/*
Lamb House, Rye.

February 8th, 1910.
*/

/*
Dearest Edith,
*/

I am in receipt of endless bounties from you and dazzling revelations
about you: item: 1st: the grapes of Paradise that arrived yesterday in a
bloom of purple and a burst of sweetness that made me--while they cast
their Tyrian glamour about--ask more ruefully than ever what porridge
poor _non_-convalescent John Keats mustn't have had: 2d: your exquisite
appeal and approach to the good--the really admirable Skinner, who has
now wrung tears of emotion from my eyes by bringing them to my
knowledge: 3d: your gentle "holograph" letter, just to hand--which
treats _my_ stupid reflections on your own patience with such heavenly
gentleness. When one is still sickish and shaky (though that, thank
goodness, is steadily ebbing) one tumbles wrong--even when one has
wanted to make the most delicate geste in life. But the great thing is
that we always tumble together--more and more never apart; and that for
that happy exercise and sweet coincidence of agility we may trust
ourselves and each other to the end of time. So I gratefully grovel for
everything--and for your beautiful and generous inquiry of Skinner ...
more than even anything else. The purple clusters are, none the less, of
a prime magnificence and of an inexpressible relevance to my state. This
is steadily bettering--thanks above all to three successive morning
motor-rides that Skinner has taken me, of an hour and a half each
(to-day in fact nearly two hours), while he goes his rounds in a fairly
far circuit over the country-side. I sit at cottage and farmhouse doors
while he warns and comforts and commands within, and, these days having
been mild and grey and convenient, the effect has been of the last
benignity. I am thus exceedingly sustained. And also by the knowledge
that you are not being wrenched from your hard-bought foyer and your
neighbourhood to your best of brothers. Cramponnez-vous-y. I don't ask
you about poor great Paris--I make out as I can by Morton's playing
flashlight. And I read Walkley on Chantecler--which sounds rather like a
glittering void. I have now dealt with Alfred and Aimée--unprofitable
pair. What a strange and compromising French document--in this sense
that it affects one as giving so many people and things away, by the
simple fact of springing so characteristically and almost squalidly out
of them. The letter in which Alf. arranges for her to come into his
dirty bedroom at 8 a.m., while his mother and brother and others
unknowingly _grouillent_ on the other side of the cloison that shall
make their _nid d'amour_, and _la façon dont elle y vole_ react back
even upon dear old George rather fatally--àpropos of dirty bedrooms,
thin cloisons and the usual state of things, one surmises, at that hour.
What an Aimée and what a Paul and what a Mme Jaubert and what an
everything!

/*
Ever your
H. J.
*/




_To Miss Jessie Allen._

/#
     The plan here projected of looking for a house in Eaton Terrace,
     where Miss Allen lived, was not carried further.
#/


/*
Lamb House, Rye.

February 20th, 1910.
*/

/*
My dear eternally martyred and murdered Goody,
*/

I am horribly ashamed to have my poor hand forced (you see what it is
and what it's reduced to) into piling up on your poor burdened
consciousness the added load of _my_ base woes (as if you weren't lying
stretched flat beneath the pressure of your own and those of some
special dozen or two of your most favourite and fatal vampires.) I
proposed you should know nothing of mine till they were all over--if
they ever _should_ be (which they are not quite yet:) and that if one
had to speak of them to you at all, it might thus be in the most
pluperfect of all past tenses and twiddling one's fingers on the tip of
one's nose, quite vulgarly, as to intimate that you were a day after the
fair.... But why do I unfold this gruesome tale when just what I most
want is _not_ to wring your insanely generous heart or work upon your
perversely exquisite sensibility? I am pulling through, and though I've
been so often somewhat better only to find myself topple back into black
despair--with bad, vilely bad, days after good ones, and not a _very_
famous one to-day--I do feel that I have definitely turned the corner
and got the fiend down, even though he still kicks as viciously as he
can yet manage. I am "up" and dressed, and in short I _eat_--after a
fashion, and have regained considerable weight (oh I had become the
loveliest sylph,) and even, I am told, a certain charm of appearance. My
good nephew Harry James, priceless youth, my elder brother's eldest
son, sailed from N.Y. yesterday to come out and see me--and that alone
lifts up my heart--for I have felt a very lonesome and stranded old
idiot. My conditions (of circumstance, house and care, &c) have on the
other hand been excellent--my servants angels of affection and devotion.
(I have indeed been _all_ in Doctor's and Nurse's hands.) So don't take
it hard now; take it utterly easy and allow your charity to stray a
little by way of a change into your own personal premises. Take a look
in _there_ and let it even make you linger. To hear you are doing _that_
will do me more good than anything else....

I yearn unutterably to get on far enough to begin to plan to come up to
town for a while. I have of late reacted intensely against this exile
from some of the resources of civilization in winter--and deliriously
dream of some future footing in London again (other than my club) for
the space of time between Xmas or so and June. What is the rent of a
house--unfurnished of course (a little good _inside_ one)--in your
Terrace?--and are there any with 2 or 3 servants' bedrooms?

Don't answer this absurdity now--but wait till we go and look at 2 or 3
together! Such is the recuperative yearning of your enfeebled but not
beaten--you can see by this scrawl--old

/*
H. J.
*/




_To Mrs. Bigelow._


/*
Lamb House, Rye.

April 19th, 1910.
*/

/*
My dear Edith,
*/

I have been much touched by your solicitude, but till now absolutely too
"bad" to write--to do anything but helplessly, yearningly languish and
suffer and surrender. I have had a perfect Hell of a Time--since just
after Xmas--nearly 15 long weeks of dismal, dreary, interminable illness
(with occasional slight pickings-up followed by black relapses.) But the
tide, thank the Powers, has at last definitely turned and I am on the
way to getting not only better, but, as I believe, creepily and abjectly
well. I sent my Nurse (my second) flying the other day, after ten deadly
weeks of her, and her predecessor's, aggressive presence and policy, and
the mere relief from that overdone discipline has done wonders for me. I
must have patience, much, yet--but my face is toward the light, which
shows, beautifully, that I look ten years older, with my bonny tresses
ten degrees whiter (like Marie Antoinette's in the Conciergerie.)
However if I've lost all my beauty and (by my expenses) most of my
money, I rejoice I've kept my friends, and I shall come and show you
_that_ appreciation yet. I am so delighted that you and the Daughterling
had your go at Italy--even though I was feeling so pre-eminently
un-Italian. The worst of that Paradise is indeed that one returns but to
Purgatories at the best. Have a little patience yet with your still
struggling but all clinging

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To W. E. Norris._


/*
Hill Hall,
Theydon Bois,
Epping.

May 22nd, 1910.
*/

/*
My dear Norris,
*/

Forgive a very brief letter and a very sad one, in which I must explain
long and complicated things in a very few words. I have had a
dismal--the most dismal and interminable illness; going on these five
months nearly, since Christmas--and of which the end is not yet; and of
which all this later stage has been (these ten or twelve weeks) a
development of nervous conditions (agitation, trepidation, black
melancholia and weakness) of a--the most--formidable and distressing
kind. My brother and sister-in-law most blessedly came on to me from
America several weeks ago; without them I had--should have--quite gone
under; and a week ago, under extreme medical urgency as to change of
air, scene, food, everything, I came here with my sister-in-law--to some
most kind friends and a beautiful place--as a very arduous experiment.
But I'm too ill to be here really, and shall crawl home as soon as
possible. I'm afraid I can't see you in London--I can plan nor do
nothing; and can only ask you, in my weakness, depression and
helplessness, to pardon this doleful story from your affectionate and
afflicted old

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Mrs. Wharton._


/*
Bittongs Hotel Hohenzollern,
Bad Nauheim.

June 10th, 1910.
*/

/*
Dearest Edith,
*/

Your kindest note met me here on my arrival with my sister last evening.
We are infinitely touched by the generous expression of it, but there
had been, and could be, no question for us of Paris--formidable at best
(that is in general) as a place of rapid transit. I had, to my sorrow, a
baddish drop on coming back from high Epping Forest (that is "Theydon
Mount") to poor little flat and stale and illness-haunted Rye--and I
felt, my Dr. strongly urging, safety to be in a prompt escape by the
straightest way (Calais, Brussels, Cologne, and Frankfort,) to this
place of thick woods, groves, springs and general Kurort soothingness,
where my brother had been for a fortnight waiting us alone. Here I am
then and having made the journey, in great heat, far better than I
feared. Slowly but definitely I _am_ emerging--yet with nervous
possibilities still too latent, too in ambush, for me to do anything but
cling for as much longer as possible to my Brother and sister. I am
wholly unfit to be alone--in spite of amelioration. That (being alone) I
can't even as yet think of--and yet feel that I must for many months to
come have none of the complications of society. In fine, to break to you
the monstrous truth, I have taken my passage with them to America by the
Canadian Pacific Steamer line ("short sea") on August 12th--to spend the
winter in America. I must break with everything--of the last couple of
years in England--and am trying if possible to let Lamb House for the
winter--also am giving up my London perch. When I come back I must have
a better. There are the grim facts--but now that I have accepted them I
see hope and reason in them. I feel that the completeness of the change
là-bas will help me more than anything else can--and the amount of
corners I have already turned (though my nervous spectre still again and
again scares me) is a kind of earnest of the rest of the process. I
cling to my companions even as a frightened cry-baby to his nurse and
protector--but of all that it is depressing, almost degrading to speak.
This place is insipid, yet soothing--very bosky and sedative and
admirably arranged, à l'allemande--but with excessive and depressing
heat just now, and a toneless air at the best. The admirable ombrages
and walks and pacifying pitch of life make up, however, for much. We
shall be here for three weeks longer (I seem to entrevoir) and then try
for something Swiss and tonic. We must be in England by Aug. 1st.

And now I simply _fear_ to challenge you on your own complications. I
can _bear_ tragedies so little. Tout se rattache so à _the_ thing--the
central depression. And yet I want so to know--and I think of you with
infinite tenderness, participation--and such a large and helpless
devotion. Well, we must hold on tight and we shall come out again face
to face--wiser than ever before (if that's any advantage!) This address,
I foresee, will find me for the next 15 days--and we might be worse
abrités. Germany has become _comfortable_. Note that much as I yearn to
you, I don't nag you with categorical (even though in Germany)
questions.... Ever your unspeakable, dearest Edith,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Mrs. Wharton._


/*
Lamb House, Rye.

July 29th, 1910.
*/

/*
Dearest Edith,
*/

It's intense joy to hear from you, and when I think that the last news I
gave you of myself was at Nauheim (it seems to me), with the nightmare
of Switzerland that followed--"Munich and the Tyrol etc.," which I
believe I then hinted at to you, proved the vainest crazy dream of but a
moment--I feel what the strain and stress of the sequel that awaited me
really became. That dire ordeal (attempted Nach-Kurs for my poor brother
at _low_ Swiss altitudes, Constance, Zurich, Lucerne, Geneva, &c.)
terminated however a fortnight ago--or more--and after a bad week in
London we are here waiting to sail on Aug. 12th. I am definitely much
better, and on the road to be _well_; a great gain has come to me, in
spite of everything, during the last ten days in particular. I say in
spite of everything, for my dear brother's condition, already so bad on
leaving the treacherous and disastrous Nauheim, has gone steadily on to
worse--he is painfully ill, weak and down, and the anxiety of it, with
our voyage in view, is a great tension to me in my still quite
_struggling_ upward state. But I stand and hold my ground none the less,
and we have really brought him on since we left London. But the
dismalness of it all--and of the sudden death, a fortnight ago, of our
younger brother in the U.S. by heart-failure in his sleep--a painless,
peaceful, enviable end to a stormy and unhappy career--makes our common
situation, all these months back and now, fairly tragic and miserable.
However, I am convinced that his getting home, if it can be securely
done, will do much for William--and I am myself now on a much "higher
plane" than I expected a very few weeks since to be. I kind of _want_,
uncannily, to go to America too--apart from several absolutely
imperative reasons for it. I rejoice unspeakably in the vision of seeing
you ... here--or even in London or at Windsor--one of these very next
days....

/*
Ever your all-affectionate, dear Edith,
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Bruce Porter._

/#
     The "bêtises" were certain Baconian clues to the authorship of
     Shakespeare's plays, which Mr. Bruce Porter had come from America
     to investigate.
#/


/*
Lamb House, Rye.

[August 1910.]
*/

/*
My dear--very!--Bruce,
*/

I rejoice to hear from you even though it entails the irritation (I
brutally showed you, in town, my accessibility to that) of your
misguided search for a sensation. You renew my harmless rage--for I hate
to see you associated (with my firm affection for you) with the most
provincial _bêtises_, and to have come so far to do it--to _be_ it
(given over to a, to _the_ Bêtise!) in a fine finished old England with
which one can have so much better relations, and so many of them--it
would make me blush, or bleed, for you, could anything you do cause me a
really _deep_ discomfort. But nothing can--I too tenderly look the other
way. So there we are. Besides you have _had_ your measles--and, though
you might have been better employed, go in peace--be measly no more. At
any rate I grossly want you to know that I am really ever so much better
than when we were together in London. I go on quite as well as I could
decently hope. It's an ineffable blessing. It's horrible somehow that
those brief moments shall have been all our meeting here, and that a
desert wider than the sea shall separate us over there; but this is a
part of that perversity in life which long ago gave me the ultimate
ache, and I cherish the memory of our scant London luck. My brother,
too, has taken a much better turn--and we sail on the 12th definitely.
So rejoice with me and believe me, my dear Bruce, all affectionately
yours,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Miss Grace Norton._


/*
Chocorua, New Hampshire.

August 26, 1910.
*/

/*
Dearest Grace,
*/

I am deeply touched by your tender note--and all the more that we have
need of tenderness, in a special degree, here now. We arrived, William
and Alice and I, in this strange, sad, rude spot, a week ago
to-night--after a most trying journey from Quebec (though after a most
beautiful, quick, in itself auspicious voyage too,) but with William
critically, mortally ill and with our anxiety and tension now (he has
rapidly got so much worse) a real anguish.... Alice is terribly
exhausted and spent--but the rest she will be able to take must
presently increase, and Harry, who, after leaving us at Quebec, started
with a friend on a much-needed holiday in the New Brunswick woods (for
shooting and fishing), was wired to yesterday to come back to us at
once. So I give you, dear Grace, our dismal chronicle of suspense and
pain. My own fears are the blackest, and at the prospect of losing my
wonderful beloved brother out of the world in which, from as far back as
in dimmest childhood, I have so yearningly always counted on him, I feel
nothing but the abject weakness of grief and even terror; but I forgive
myself "weakness"--my emergence from the long and grim ordeal of my own
peculiarly dismal and trying illness isn't yet absolutely complete
enough to make me wholly firm on my feet. But _my_ slowly recuperative
process goes on despite all shakes and shocks, while dear William's, in
the full climax of his intrinsic powers and intellectual ambitions,
meets this tragic, cruel arrest. However, dear Grace, I won't further
wail to you in my nervous soreness and sorrow--still, in spite of so
much revival, more or less under the shadow as I am of the miserable,
damnable year that began for me last Christmas-time and for which I had
been spoiling for two years before. I will only wait to see you--with
all the tenderness of our long, unbroken friendship and all the host of
our common initiations. I have come for a long stay--though when we
shall be able to plan for a resumption of life in Irving Street is of
course insoluble as yet. Then, at all events, with what eagerness your
threshold will be crossed by your faithfullest old

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/

P.S. It's to-day blessedly cooler here--and I hope you also have the
reprieve!

P.S. I open my letter of three hours since to add that William passed
unconsciously away an hour ago--without apparent pain or struggle. Think
of us, dear Grace, think of us!




_To Thomas Sergeant Perry._


/*
Chocorua, N.H.
Sept. 2nd, 1910.
*/

/*
My dear old Thomas,
*/

I sit heavily stricken and in darkness--for from far back in dimmest
childhood he had been my ideal Elder Brother, and I still, through all
the years, saw in him, even as a small timorous boy yet, my protector,
my backer, my authority and my pride. His extinction changes the face of
life for me--besides the mere missing of his inexhaustible company and
personality, originality, the whole unspeakably vivid and beautiful
presence of him. And his noble intellectual vitality was still but at
its climax--he had two or three ardent purposes and plans. He had cast
them away, however, at the end--I mean that, dreadfully suffering, he
wanted only to die. Alice and I had a bitter pilgrimage with him from
far off--he sank here, on his threshold; and then it went horribly fast.
I cling for the present to _them_--and so try to stay here through this
month. After that I shall be with them in Cambridge for several more--we
shall cleave more together. I should like to come and see you for a
couple of days much, but it would have to be after the 20th, or even
October 1st, I think; and I fear you may not then be still in
villeggiatura. _If_ so I _will_ come. You knew him--among those living
now--from furthest back with me. Yours and Lilla's all faithfully,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Mrs. Wharton._


/*
Chocorua, N.H.
Sept. 9th, 1910.
*/

/*
Dearest Edith,
*/

Your letter from Annecy ... touches me, as I sit here stricken and in
darkness, with the tenderest of hands. It was all to become again a
black nightmare (what seems to me such now,) from very soon after I left
you, to these days of attempted readjustment of life, on the basis of my
beloved brother's irredeemable absence from it, in which I take my part
with my sister-in-law and his children here. I quitted you at
Folkestone, August 9th (just a month ago to-day--and it seems six!) to
find him, at Lamb House, apparently not a little eased by the devoted
Skinner, and with the elements much more auspicious for our journey than
they had been a fortnight before. We got well enough to town on the
11th, and away from it, to Liverpool, on the 12th, and the voyage, in
the best accommodations &c we had ever had at sea, and of a wondrous
lakelike and riverlike fairness and brevity, might, if he had been
really less ill, have made for his holding his ground. But he grew
rapidly worse again from the start and suffered piteously and dreadfully
(with the increase of his difficulty in breathing;) and we got him at
last to this place (on the evening of the Friday following that of our
sailing) only to see him begin swiftly to sink. The sight of the
rapidity of it at the last was an unutterable pang--my sense of what he
had still to _give_, of his beautiful genius and noble intellect at
their very climax, never having been anything but intense, and in fact
having been intenser than ever all these last months. However, my
relation to him and my affection for him, and the different aspect his
extinction has given for me to my life, are all unutterable matters;
fortunately, as there would be so _much_ to say about them if I said
anything at all. The effect of it all is that I shall stay on here for
the present--for some months to come (I mean in this country;) and then
return to England never to revisit these shores again. I am
inexpressibly glad to have been, and even to be, here now--I cling to my
sister-in-law and my nephews and niece: they are all (wonderful to say)
such admirable, lovable, able and interesting persons, and they cling to
me in return. I hope to be in this spot with them till Oct. 15th--there
is a great appeal in it from its saturation with my brother's presence
and life here, his use and liking of it for 23 years, a sad subtle
consecration which plays out the more where so few other things
interfere with it. Ah, the thin, empty, lonely, melancholy American
"beauty"--which I yet find a cold prudish charm in! I shall go back to
Cambridge with my companions and stay there at least till the New
Year--which is all that seems definite for the present....

All devotedly yours, dearest Edith,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Mrs. Charles Hunter._


/*
Chocorua, N.H.
Oct: 1: 1910.
*/

/*
Dearest Mary Hunter,
*/

Beautiful and tender the letter I just receive from you--and that
follows by a few days an equally beneficent one to my sister. She will
(if she hasn't done it already) thank you for this herself--and tell you
how deeply we feel the kindly balm of your faithful thought of us. Our
return here, with my brother so acutely suffering and so all too
precipitately (none the less) succumbing altogether--quite against what
seemed presumable during our last three weeks in England--was a dreadful
time; from the worst darkness of which we are, however, gradually
emerging.... What is for the time a great further support is the
wondrous beauty of this region, where we are lingering on three or four
weeks more (when it becomes too cold in a house built only for
summer--in spite of glorious wood-fires;) this season being the finest
thing in the American year for weather and colour. The former is golden
and the latter, amid these innumerable mountains and great forests and
frequent lakes, a magnificence of crimson and orange, a mixture of
flames and gems. I shall stay for some months (I mean on this side of
the sea;) and yet I am so homesick that I seem to feel that when I do
get back to dear little old England, I shall never in my life leave it
again. We cling to each other, all of us here, meanwhile, and I can
never be sufficiently grateful to my fate for my having been with my
dearest brother for so many weeks before his death and up to the bitter
end. I am better and better than three months ago, thank heaven, in
spite of everything, and really believe I shall end by being better
than I have been at all these last years, when I was spoiling for my
illness. I pray most devoutly that Salso will again repay and refresh
and comfort you; I absolutely yearn to see you, and I am yours all
affectionately always,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Mrs. W. K. Clifford._


/*
95 Irving Street,
Cambridge, Mass.
October 29th, 1910.
*/

/*
Dearest Lucy!
*/

My silence has been atrocious, since the receipt of two quite divine
letters from you, but the most particular blessing of you is that with
you one needn't explain nor elaborate nor take up the burden of dire
demonstration, because you understand and you feel, you allow, and you
_know_, and above all you love (your poor old entangled and afflicted
H.J.).... Now at last I am really on the rise and on the higher ground
again--more than I have been, and more unmistakeably, than at any time
since the first of my illness. Your letters meanwhile, dearest Lucy,
were admirable and exquisite, in their rare beauty of your knowing, for
the appreciation of such a loss and such a wound, immensely what you
were talking about. Every word went to my heart, and it was as if you
sat by me and held my hand and let me wail, and wailed yourself, so
gently and intelligently, _with_ me. The extinction of such a presence
in my life as my great and radiant (even in suffering and sorrow)
brother's, means a hundred things that I can't begin to say; but
immense, all the same, are the abiding possessions, the interest and the
honour. We will talk of all these things by your endlessly friendly
fire in due time again (oh how I gnash my teeth with homesickness at
that dear little Chilworth St. vision of old lamp lit gossiping hours!)
and we will pull together meanwhile as intimately and unitedly as
possible even thus across the separating sea. I have pretty well settled
to remain on this side of that wintry obstacle till late in the spring.
I am at present with my priceless sister-in-law and her dear delightful
children. We came back a short time since from the country (I going for
ten days to New York, the prodigious, from which I have just returned,
while she, after her so long and tragic absence, settled us admirably
for the winter.) We all hang unspeakably together, and that's why I am
staying. I am getting back to work--though the flood of letters to be
breasted by reason of my brother's death and situation has been
formidable in the extreme, and the "breasting" (with the very weak hand
only that I have been able, till now to lend) is even yet far from over.
My companions are unspeakably kind to me, and I cherish the break in the
excess of solitude that I have been steeped in these last years. If I
get as "well" as I see reason now at last to believe, I shall be
absolutely better than at any time for three or four--and shall even
feel sweetly younger (by a miraculous emergence from my hideous year.)
Dreams of work come back to me--which I've a superstitious dread still,
however, of talking about. Materially and carnally speaking my
"comfort"--odious word!--in a most pleasant, commodious house, is
absolute, and is much fostered by my having brought with me my devoted
if diminutive Burgess, whom you will remember at Lamb House.... During
all which time, however, see how I don't prod you with questions about
yourself--in spite of my burning thirst for knowledge. After the
generosity of your letters of last month how can I ask you to labour
again in my too thankless cause? But I do yearn over you, and I needn't
tell you how any rough sketch of your late history will gladden my
sight. I wrote a day or two ago to Hugh Walpole and besought him to go
and see you and make me some sign of you--which going and gathering-in I
hope he of himself, and constantly, takes to. I think of you as always
heroic--but I hope that no particular extra need for it has lately
salted your cup. Is Margaret on better ground again? God grant it! But
such things as I wish to talk about--I mean that we _might_! But with
patience the hour will strike--like silver smiting silver. Till then I
am so far-offishly and so affectionately yours,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To W. E. Norris._


/*
95 Irving St.
Cambridge, Mass.
Dec. 13th, 1910.
*/

/*
My dear Norris,
*/

I detest the thought that some good word or other from me shouldn't add
to the burden with which your Xmas table will groan; fortunately too the
decently "good" word (as goods go at this dark crisis) is the one that I
_can_ break my long and hideous silence to send you. The only difficulty
is that when silences have been so long and so hideous the renewal of
the communication, the patching-up (as regards the mere facts) of the
weakened and ragged link, becomes in itself a necessity, or a question,
formidable even to deterrence. I have had verily an _année
terrible_--the fag-end of which is, however, an immense improvement on
everything that has preceded it. I won't attempt, none the less, to make
up arrears of information in any degree whatever--but simply let off at
you this rude but affectionate signal from the desert-island of my
shipwreck--or what would be such if my situation were not, on the whole,
the one with which I am for the present most in tune. I am staying on
here with my dear and admirable sister-in-law and her children, with
whom I have been ever since my beloved and illustrious elder brother's
death in the country at the end of August.... My younger brother had
died just a month before--and I am alone now, of my father's once rather
numerous house. But there--I am trying to pick up lost chords--which is
what I didn't mean to ... I expect to stick fast here through January
and then go for a couple of months to New York--after which I shall
begin to turn my face to England--heaven send that day! The detail of
this is, however, fluid and subject to alteration--in everything save my
earnest purpose of struggling back by April or May at furthest to your
(or verily _my_) distressed country; for which I unceasingly
languish.... The material conditions here (that is the best of
them--others intensely and violently _not_) suit me singularly at
present; as for instance the great and glorious American fact of
weather, to which it all mainly comes back, but which, since last August
here, I have never known anything to surpass. While I write you this I
bask in golden December sunshine and dry, crisp, mild frost--over a
great _nappe_ of recent snow, which flushes with the "tenderest" lights.
This does me a world of good--and the fact that I have brought with me
my little Lamb House servant, who has lived with me these 10 years; but
for the rest my life is exclusively in this one rich nest of old
affections and memories. I put you, you see, no questions, but please
find half a dozen very fond ones wrapped up in every good wish I send
you for the coming year. A couple of nos. of the _Times_ have just come
in--and though the telegraph has made them rather ancient history I
hang over them for the dear old more vivid sense of it all....

Yours, my dear Norris, all affectionately,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Mrs. Wharton._


/*
95 Irving Street,
Cambridge, Mass.
Feb. 9th, 1911.
*/

/*
Dearest Edith,
*/

Hideous and infamous, yes, my interminable, my abjectly graceless
silence. But it always comes, in these abnormal months, from the same
sorry little cause, which I have already named to you to such satiety
that I really might omit any further reference to it. Somehow, none the
less, I find a vague support in my consciousness of an unsurpassable
abjection (as aforesaid) in naming it once more to _myself_ and putting
afresh on record that there's a method in what I feel might pass for my
madness if _you_ weren't so nobly sane. To write is perforce _to report
of myself_ and my condition--and nothing has happened to make that
process any less an evil thing. It's horrible to me to report darkly and
dismally--and yet I never venture three steps in the opposite direction
without having the poor effrontery flung back in my face as an outrage
on the truth. In other words, to report favourably is instantly--or at
very short order--to be hurled back on the couch of anguish--so that the
only thing has, for the most part, been to stay my pen rather than _not_
report favourably. You'll say doubtless: "Damn you, why report _at
all_--if you are so crassly superstitious? Answer civilly and prettily
and punctually when a lady (and 'such a lady,' as Browning says!)
generously and à deux reprises writes to you--without 'dragging in
Velasquez' at all." Very well then, I'll try--though it was after all
pretty well poor old Velasquez who came back three evenings since from
23 days in New York, and at 21 East 11th St., of which the last six were
practically spent in bed. He had had a very fairly flourishing fortnight
in that kindest of houses and tenderest of cares and genialest of
companies--and then repaid it all by making himself a burden and a bore.
I got myself out of the way as soon as possible--by scrambling back
here; and yet, all inconsequently, I think it likely I shall return
there in March to perform the same evolution. In the intervals I quite
take notice--but at a given moment everything temporarily goes. I come
up again and quite well up--as how can I not in order again to re-taste
the bitter cup? But here I am "reporting of myself" with a
vengeance--forgive me if it's too dreary. When all's said and done it
will eventually--the whole case--become less so. Meanwhile, too, for my
consolation, I have picked up here and there wind-borne _bribes_, of a
more or less authentic savour, from your own groaning board; and my poor
old imagination does me in these days no better service than by enabling
me to hover, like a too-participant larbin, behind your Louis XIV chair
(if it isn't, your chair, Louis Quatorze, at least your larbin takes it
so.) I gather you've been able to drive the spirited pen without
cataclysms.... I take unutterable comfort in the thought that two or
three months hence you'll probably be seated on the high-piled and
_done_ book--in the magnificent authority of the position, even as
Catherine II on the throne of the Czars. (Forgive the implications of
the comparison!) Work seems far from _me_ yet--though perhaps a few
inches nearer. A report even reaches me to the effect that there's a
possibility of your deciding ... to come over and spend the summer at
the Mount, and this is above all a word to say that in case you should
do so at all betimes you will probably still see me here; as though I
have taken my passage for England my date is only the 14th June.
Therefore should you come May 1st--well, Porphyro grows faint! I yearn
over this--since if you shouldn't come then (and yet should be coming at
all,) heaven knows when we shall meet again. There are enormous reasons
for my staying here till then, and enormous ones against my staying
longer.

Such, dearest Edith, is my meagre budget--forgive me if it isn't
brighter and richer. I am but _just_ pulling through--and I am doing
_that_, but no more, and so, you see, have no wild graces or wavy
tendrils left over for the image I project. I shall try to _grow_ some
again, little by little; but for the present am as ungarnished in every
way as an aged plucked fowl before the cook has dealt with him. May the
great Chef see his way to serve me up to you some day in some better
sauce! As I am, at any rate, share me generously with your I am sure not
infrequent commensaux ... and ask them to make the best of me (an' they
love me--as I love _them_) even if you give them only the drumsticks and
keep the comparatively tender, though much shrivelled, if once mighty,
"pinion" for yourself ... I saw no one of the least "real fascination"
(_excusez du peu_ of the conception!) in N.Y.--but the place relieved
and beguiled me--so long as I was _debout_--and Mary Cadwal and Beatrix
were as tenderest nursing mother and bonniest soeur de lait to me the
whole day long. I really think I shall take--shall risk--another go of
it before long again, and even snatch a "bite" of Washington (Washington
pie, as we used to say,) to which latter the dear H. Whites have most
kindly challenged me. Well, such, dearest Edith, are the short and
simple annals of the poor! I hang about you, however inarticulately, de
toutes les forces de mon être and am always your fondly faithful old

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Miss Rhoda Broughton._


/*
95 Irving Street,
Cambridge, Mass.
February 25th, 1911.
*/

/*
Dear Rhoda Broughton,
*/

I hate, and have hated all along, the accumulation of silence and
darkness in the once so bright and animated air of our ancient
commerce--that is our old and so truly valid friendship; and I am
irresistibly moved to strike a fresh light, as it were, and sound a
hearty call--so that the uncanny spell may break (working, as it has
done, so much by my own fault, or my great infirmity.) I have just had a
letter from dear Mary Clarke, not overflowing with any particularly
blest tidings, and containing, as an especial note of the minor key, an
allusion to your apparently aggravated state of health and rather
captive condition. This has caused a very sharp pang in my battered
breast--for steadily battered I have myself been, battered all round and
altogether, these long months and months past: even if not to the
complete extinction of a tender sense for the woes of others.

...I tell you my sorry tale, please believe me, not to harrow you up or
"work upon" you--under the harrow as you have yourself been so cruelly
condemned to sit; but only because when one has been long useless and
speechless and graceless, and when one's poor powers then again begin to
reach out for exercise, one immensely wants a few persons to know that
one hasn't been basely indifferent or unaware, but simply gagged, so to
speak, and laid low--simply helpless and reduced to naught. And then my
desire has been great to talk with you, and I even feel that I am doing
so a little through this pale and limping substitute--and such are some
of the cheerful points I should infallibly have made _had_ I been--or
were I just now--face to face with you. Heaven speed the day for some
occasion more _like_ that larger and braver contact than these
ineffectual accents. Such are the prayers with which I beguile the
tedium of vast wastes of homesickness here--where, frankly, the sense of
aching exile attends me the live-long day, and resists even the dazzle
of such days as these particular ones happen to be--a glory of golden
sunshine and air both crisp and soft, that pours itself out in unstinted
floods and would transfigure and embellish the American scene to my
jaundiced eye if anything _could_. But better fifty years of
fogland--where indeed I have, alas, almost _had_ my fifty years!
However, count on me to at least _try_ to put in a few more.

...I hear from Howard Sturgis, and I hear, that is _have_ heard from W.
E. Norris; but so have you, doubtless, oftener and more cheeringly than
I: all such communications seem to me today in the very minor key
indeed--in which respect they match my own (you at least will say!) But
I don't dream of your "answering" this--it pretends to all the purity of
absolutely disinterested affection. I only wish I could fold up in it
some faint reflection of the flood of golden winter sunshine, some
breath of the still, mild, already vernal air that wraps me about here
(as I just mentioned,) while I write, and reminds me that grim and prim
Boston is after all in the latitude of Rome--though indeed only to mock
at the aching impatience of your all faithful, forth-reaching old
friend,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To H. G. Wells._


/*
95 Irving Street,
Cambridge, Mass.
March 3rd, 1911.
*/

/*
My dear Wells,
*/

I seem to have had notice from my housekeeper at Rye that you have very
kindly sent me there a copy of the New Machiavelli--which she has
forborne to forward me to these tariff-guarded shores; in obedience to
my general instructions. But this needn't prevent me from thanking you
for the generous gift, which will keep company with a brave row of other
such valued signs of your remembrance at Lamb House; thanking you all
the more too that I hadn't waited for gift or guerdon to fall on you and
devour you, but have just lately been finding the American issue of your
wondrous book a sufficient occasion for that. Thus it is that I can't
rest longer till I make you some small sign at last of my conscious
indebtedness.

I have read you then, I need scarcely tell you, with an intensified
sense of that life and force and temperament, that fulness of endowment
and easy impudence of genius, which makes you extraordinary and which
have long claimed my unstinted admiration: you being for me so much the
most interesting and masterful prose-painter of your English generation
(or indeed of your generation unqualified) that I see you hang there
over the subject scene practically all alone; a far-flaring even though
turbid and smoky lamp, projecting the most vivid and splendid golden
splotches, _creating_ them about the field--shining scattered
innumerable morsels of a huge smashed mirror. I seem to feel that there
can be no better proof of your great gift--_The N.M._ makes me most
particularly feel it--than that you bedevil and coerce to the extent
you do such a reader and victim as I am, I mean one so engaged on the
side of ways and attempts to which yours are extremely alien, and for
whom the great interest of the art we practise involves a lot of
considerations and preoccupations over which you more and more ride
roughshod and triumphant--when you don't, that is, with a strange and
brilliant impunity of your own, leave them to one side altogether (which
_is_ indeed what you now apparently incline most to do.) Your big
feeling for life, your capacity for chewing up the thickness of the
world in such enormous mouthfuls, while you fairly slobber, so to speak,
with the multitudinous taste--this constitutes for me a rare and
wonderful and admirable exhibition, on your part, in itself, so that one
should doubtless frankly ask one's self what the devil, in the way of
effect and evocation and general demonic activity, one wants more. Well,
I am willing for to-day to let it stand at that; the whole of the
earlier part of the book, or the first half, is so alive and
kicking--and sprawling!--so vivid and rich and strong--above all so
_amusing_ (in the high sense of the word,) and I make remonstrance--for
I do remonstrate--bear upon the bad service you have done your cause by
riding so hard again that accurst autobiographic form which puts a
premium on the loose, the improvised, the cheap and the easy. Save in
the fantastic and the romantic (Copperfield, Jane Eyre, that charming
thing of Stevenson's with the bad title--"Kidnapped"?) it has no
authority, no persuasive or convincing force--its grasp of reality and
truth isn't strong and disinterested. R. Crusoe, e.g., isn't a novel at
all. There is, to my vision, no authentic, and no really interesting and
no _beautiful_, report of things on the novelist's, the painter's part
unless a particular detachment has operated, unless the great stewpot or
crucible of the imagination, of the observant and recording and
interpreting mind in short, has intervened and played its part--and
this detachment, this chemical transmutation for the aesthetic, the
representational, end is terribly wanting in autobiography brought, as
the horrible phrase is, up to date. That's my main "criticism" on the
_N.M._--and on the whole ground there would be a hundred things more to
say. It's accurst that I am not near enough to you to say them in less
floundering fashion than this--but give me time (I return to England in
June, never again, D.V., to leave it--surprise Mr. Remington thereby as
I may!) and we will jaw as far as you will keep me company. Meanwhile I
don't _want_ to send across the wintry sea anything but my expressed
gratitude for the immense impressionistic and speculative wealth and
variety of your book. Yours, my dear Wells, ever,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/

P.S. I think the exhibition of "Love" as "Love"--functional Love--always
suffers from a certain inevitable and insurmountable flat-footedness
(for the reader's nerves etc.;) which is only to be counterplotted by
roundabout arts--as by tracing it through indirectness and tortuosities
of application and effect--to keep it somehow interesting and productive
(though I don't mean _re_productive!) But this again is a big subject.

_P.S. 2._ I am like your hero's forsaken wife: I know _having_ things
(the things of life, history, the world) only as, and by _keeping_ them.
So, and so only, I _do_ have them!




_To C. E. Wheeler._

/#
     "The Outcry" had not appeared on the stage, but was shortly to be
     published in the form of a narrative. The following refers to a
     suggestion, not carried further at this time, that the play might
     be performed by the Stage Society.
#/


/*
21 East Eleventh Street,
New York City.
April 9th, 1911.
*/

/*
Dear Christopher Wheeler,
*/

I am _not_ back in England, as you see, and shall not be till toward the
end of June. I have _almost_ recovered from the very compromised state
in which my long illness of last year left me, but not absolutely and
wholly. I am, however, in a very much better way, and the rest is a
question of more or less further patience and prudence. About the
"Outcry," in the light of your plan, I am afraid that the moment isn't
favourable for me to discuss or decide. I have made a disposition, a
"literary use," of that work (so as not to have to view it as merely
wasted labour on the one hand and not sickeningly to hawk it about on
the other) which isn't propitious to any other _present_ dealing with
it--though it might not (in fact certainly wouldn't) [be unfavourable]
to some eventual theatrical life for it. Before I do anything else I
must first see what shall come of the application I have made of my
play. This, you see, is a practically unhelpful answer to your
interesting inquiry, and I am sorry the actual situation so limits the
matter. I rejoice in your continued interest in the theatrical question,
and I dare say your idea as to a repertory effort on the lines you
mention is a thing of light and life. But I have little heart or
judgment left, as I grow older, for the mere _theatrical_ mystery: the
drama interests me as much as ever, but I see the theatre-experiment of
this, that or the other supposedly enlightened kind prove, all round me,
so abysmally futile and fallacious and treacherous that I am practically
quite "off" from it and can but let it pass. Pardon my weary
cynicism--and try me again later. The conditions--the theatre-question
generally--in this country are horrific and unspeakable--utter, and so
far as I can see irreclaimable, barbarism reigns. The anomalous fact is
that the theatre, so called, can flourish in barbarism, but that any
_drama_ worth speaking of can develop but in the air of civilization.
However, keep tight hold of your clue and believe me yours ever,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Dr. J. William White._


/*
95 Irving Street,
Cambridge, Mass.
May 12th, 1911.
*/

/*
My dear J. William,
*/

I have from far back so dragged you, and the gentle Letitia even, not
less, through the deep dark desperate discipline of my unmatched genius
for not being quick on the epistolary trigger, that, with such a
perfection of schooling--quite my prize pupils and little show
performers in short--I can be certain that you won't so much as have
turned a hair under my recent probably unsurpassed exhibitions of it.
Nevertheless I shall expect you to sit up and look bright and gratified
(even quite intelligent--like true heads of the class) now that I do
write and reward your exemplary patience and beautiful drill. Yes, dear
prize pupils, I feel I can fully depend on you to regard the present as
a "regular answer" to your sweet letter from Bermuda; or to behave,
beautifully, as if you _did_--which comes to the same thing. Above all I
can trust you to believe that if _your_ discipline has been stiff, that
of your battered and tattered old disciplinarian himself has been
stiffer--incessant and uninterrupted and really not leaving him a
moment's attention for anything else. He is still very limp and
bewildered with it all--yet with a gleam of better things ahead, that
after his dire and interminable ordeal, and though the gleam has but
just broken out, causes him to turn to you again with that fond fidelity
which enjoyed its liveliest expression, in the ancient past, on the day,
never to be forgotten, when we had such an affectionate scuffle to get
ahead of each other in making a joyous bonfire of Lamb House in honour
of your so acclaimed arrival there: Letitia sitting by, with her
impartial smile, as the queen of beauty at a Tournament. (She will
remember how she crowned the victor--I modestly forbear to name him: and
what a ruinously--to _him_--genial _feu de joie_ resulted from the
expensive application of my brandished torch.) Well, the upshot of it
all is that I have put off my sailing by the Mauretania of June
14th--but not alas to your Olympic, vessel of the gods, evidently, later
that month. I have shifted to the same Mauretania of August 2nd--urgent
and intimate family reasons making for my stop-over till then. So when I
see you in England, as I fondly count on doing after this dismal
interlude, it will be during the delightful weeks you will spend there
in the autumn, when all your athletic laurels have been gathered, all
your high-class hotels checked off, all your obedient servants (except
me!) tipped, and all your portentous drafts honoured. Let us plot out
those sweet September days a little even now--let _me_ at least dream of
them as a supreme test, proof and consecration, of what returning health
will once more enable me to stand. I am too unutterably glad to be going
back even with a further delay--I am wasted to a shadow (even though
the shadow of a still formidable mass) by homesickness (for the home I
once had--before we applied the match. You see the loss for you
_now_--by the way: if you had only allowed it to stand!) I have taken
places in the Reform Gallery "for the coronation"--and won them by
ballot--for the second procession: and now palmed them off on two of my
female victims--after _such_ a quandary in the choice! Apropos of
coronations and such-like, won't you, when you write, very kindly give
me some news of the dear dashing Abbeys, long lost to sight and sound of
me? It has come round to me in vague ways that they have at last
actually left Morgan Hall for some newly-acquired princely estate: do
you know where and what the place is? A gentle word on this head would
immensely assuage my curiosity. Where-ever and whatever it is, let us
stay there together next September! You see therefore how practical my
demand is. Of course Ned will paint this coronation too--while his hand
is in. And oh you should be here now to share a holy rage with me....
Such is this babyish democracy.

Ever your grand, yet attached old aristocrat,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To T. Bailey Sanders._


/*
Barack-Matiff Farm,
Salisbury, Conn.
May 27, 1911.
*/

/*
My dear Bailey,
*/

It greatly touches and gratifies me to hear from you--even though I have
to inflict on you the wound of a small announced (positively last)
postponement of my re-appearance. I _like_ to think that you may be a
little wounded--wanton as that declaration sounds; for it gives me the
measure of my being cared for in poor dear old distracted England--than
which there can be no sweeter or more healing sense to my bruised and
aching and oh so nostalgic soul.... I am exceedingly better in health, I
thank the "powers"--and even presume to figure it out that I shall next
slip between the soft swing-doors of Athene in the character of a
confirmed improver, struggler upward, or even bay-crowned victor over
ills. Don't lament my small procrastination--a matter of only six weeks;
for I shall then still better know where and how I am. I am at the
present hour (more literally) staying with some amiable cousins, of the
more amiable sex--supposedly at least (my supposition is not about the
cousins, but about the sex)--in the deep warm heart of "New England at
its best." This large Connecticut scenery of mountain and broad vale,
recurrent great lake and splendid river (the great Connecticut itself,
the Housatonic, the Farmington,) all embowered with truly prodigious
elms and maples, is very noble and charming and sympathetic, and
made--on its great scale of extent--to be dealt with by the blest
motor-car, the consolation of my declining years. This luxury I am
charitably much treated to, and it does me a world of good. The
enormous, the unique ubiquity of the "auto" here suggests many
reflections--but I can't go into these now, or into any branch of the
prodigious economic or "sociological" side of this unspeakable and
amazing country; I must keep such matters to regale you withal in poor
dear little Lamb House garden; for one brick of the old battered purple
wall of which I would give at this instant (home-sick quand même) the
whole bristling state of Connecticut. I shall "stay about" till I
embark--that may represent to you my temperamental or other gain.
However, you must autobiographically regale me not a bit less than
yours, my dear Bailey, all faithfully,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Sir T. H. Warren._

/#
     The following letter to the President of Magdalen refers to the
     offer of an honorary degree at Oxford, subsequently conferred in
     1912.
#/


/*
Salisbury, Connecticut.
May 29th, 1911.
*/

/*
My dear President,
*/

I was more sorry than I can say to have to cable you last evening in
that disabled sense. I had some time ago taken my return passage to
England for June 14th, but more lately the President of Harvard was so
good as to invite me to receive an Honorary Degree at their hands on the
28th of that month--the same day as your Encaenia. Urgent and intimate
family reasons conspired to make a delay advisable; so I accepted the
Harvard invitation and have shifted my departure to August 2nd.

Behold me thus committed to Harvard--and unable moreover at this season
of the multitudinous (I mean of the rush to Europe) to get a decent
berth on an outward ship even were I to try. The formal document from
the University arrived with your kind letter--proposing to me the Degree
of Doctor of Letters, as your letter mentions; and quickened my great
regret at being thus perversely prevented from embracing an occasion the
appeal of which I might so have connected with your benevolence.

I should feel an Oxford degree a very great honour and a great
consideration, and I am writing of course to the Registrar of the
University. I rejoice to be going back at last to a more immediate--or
more possible--sight and sound of you and of all your surrounding
amenities and glories. Yet I wish too I could open to you for a few days
the impression of the things about me here; in the warm, the very warm,
heart of "New England at its best," such a vast abounding Arcadia of
mountains and broad vales and great rivers and large lakes and white
villages embowered in prodigious elms and maples. It is extraordinarily
beautiful and graceful and idyllic--for America....

I am very sincerely and faithfully and gratefully yours,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Miss Ellen Emmet._

/#
     Mrs. George Hunter and her daughters had been H. J.'s hostesses at
     Salisbury, Connecticut, in the preceding May.
#/


/*
Lamb House, Rye.
Aug. 15th, 1911.
*/

/*
Beloved dearest darling Bay!
*/

Your so beautifully human letter of Aug. 1st reaches me here this a.m.
through Harry--who appears to have picked it out of perdition at the
Belmont after I had sailed (at peep of dawn) on Aug. 2nd. It deeply and
exquisitely touches me--so bowed down under the shame of my long silence
to all your House, to your splendid mother in particular, have I
remained ever since the day I brought my little visit to you to a heated
close--which sounds absurdly as if I had left you in a rage after a
violent discussion. But you will know too well what I mean and how the
appalling summer that was even then beginning so actively to cook for us
could only prove a well-nigh fatal dish to your aged and infirm uncle.
I met the full force of this awful and almost (to the moment I sailed)
unbroken visitation just after leaving you--and, frankly, it simply
demoralized me and flattened me out. Manners, memories, decencies, all
alike fell from me and I simply lay for long weeks a senseless,
stricken, perspiring, inconsiderate, unclothed mass. I expected and
desired nothing but to melt utterly away--and could only treat my
nearest and dearest as if _they_ expected and desired no more. I am
convinced that you all didn't and that you noticed not at all that I had
become a most ungracious and uncommunicative recipient of your bounty. I
lived from day to day, most of the time in my bath, and please tell your
mother that when I thought of you it was to say to myself, "oh, they're
all up to their necks together in their Foxhunter spring, and it would
be really indiscreet to break in upon them!" That is how I do trust you
have mainly spent your time--though in your letter you're too delicate
to mention it. I was caught as in two or three firetraps--I mean places
of great and special suffering, as during a week at the terrific
Intervale, N.H., from July 1st to 8th or so (with the kind Merrimans,
themselves Salamanders, who served me nothing but hot food and expected
clothing;) but I found a blest refuge betimes with my kind old friend
George James (widower of Lily Lodge,) at the tip end of the Nahant
promontory, quite out at sea, where, amid gardens and groves and on a
vast breezy verandah, my life was most mercifully saved and where I
stuck fast till the very eve of my sailing.... I got back _here_,
myself, with a great sense that it was, quite desperately, high time;
though, alas, I came upon the same brassy sky and red-hot air here as I
left behind me--it has been as formidable a summer here as in the U.S.
Everything is scorched and blighted--my garden a thing almost of
cinders. There has been no rain for weeks and weeks, the thermometer is
mostly at 90, and still it goes on. (90 in this thick English air is
like 100 with us.) The like was never seen, and famine-threatening
strikes (at London and Liverpool docks,) with wars and rumours of wars
and the smash of the House of Lords and, as many people hold, of the
constitution, complete the picture of a distracted and afflicted
country. Nevertheless I shouldn't mind it so much if we could only have
rain. _Then_ I think all troubles would end, or mend--and at least I
should begin to find myself again. I can't do so yet, and am waiting to
see how and where I am.

I directed Notman, of Boston, to send you a photograph of a little
old--ever so ancient--ambrotype lent me by Lilla Perry to have
copied--her husband T.S.P. having been in obscure possession of it for
half a century. It will at least show you where and how I was in about
my 16th year. I strike myself as such a sweet little thing that I want
you, and your mother, to see it in order to believe it--though she will
believe it more easily than you. It looks even a great deal like _her_
about that time too--we were always thought to look a little alike....
My journey (voyage) out on the big smooth swift Mauretania gave me, and
has left me with, such a sense as of a few hours' pampered _ferry_,
making a mere mouthful of the waste of waters, that I kind of promise
myself to come back "all the time." I had never been so blandly just
lifted across. Tell your mother and Rosina and Leslie that I just
cherish and adore them all. I cling to the memory of all those lovely
motor-hours; tell Leslie in particular how dear I hold the remembrance
of our run together to Stockbridge and Emily T.'s that wonderful long
day. And I had the sweetest passages with great Rosina. But I fold you
all together in my arms, with Grenville, please, well in the thick of
it, and am, darling Bay, your most faithfully fond old

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Howard Sturgis._


/*
Lamb House, Rye.
August 17th, 1911.
*/

/*
Beloved creature!
*/

As if I hadn't mainly spent my time since my return here (a week ago
yesterday) in writhing and squirming for very shame at having left your
several, or at least your generously two or three last, exquisite
outpourings unanswered. But I had long before sailing from là-bas,
dearest Howard, and especially during the final throes and exhaustions,
been utterly overturned by the savage heat and drought of a summer that
had set in furiously the very last of May, going crescendo all that
time--and of which I am finding here (so far as the sky of brass and the
earth of cinders is concerned) so admirable an imitation. I have shown
you often enough, I think, how much more I have in me of the polar bear
than of the salamander--and in fine, at the time I last heard from you,
pen, ink and paper had dropped from my perspiring grasp (though while
_in_ the grasp they had never felt more adhesively sticky,) and I had
become a mere prostrate, panting, liquefying mass, wailing to be
removed. I _was_ removed--at the date I mention--pressing your supreme
benediction (in the form of eight sheets of lovely "stamped paper," as
they say in the U.S.) to my heaving bosom; but only to less sustaining
and refreshing conditions than I had hoped for here. You will understand
how some of these--in this seamed and cracked and blasted and distracted
country--strike me; and perhaps even a little how I seem to myself to
have been transferred simply from one sizzling grid-iron to another--at
a time when my further toleration of grid-irons had reached its lowest
ebb. _Such_ a pile of waiting letters greeted me here--most of them
pushing in with an indecency of clamour before _your_ dear delicate
signal. But it is always of you, dear and delicate and supremely
interesting, that I have been thinking, and here is just a poor
palpitating stopgap of a reply. Don't take it amiss of my wise affection
if I tell you that I am heartily glad you are going to Scotland. Go,
_go_, and stay as long as you ever can--it's the sort of thing exactly
that will do you a world of good. I am to go there, I believe, next
month, to stay four or five days with John Cadwalader--and eke with
Minnie of that ilk (or more or less,) in Forfarshire--but that will
probably be lateish in the month; and before I go you will have come
back from the Eshers and I have returned from a visit of a few days
which I expect to embark upon on Saturday next. Then, when we are
gathered in, no power on earth will prevent me from throwing myself on
your bosom. Forgive meanwhile the vulgar sufficiency and banality of my
advice, above, as to what will "do you good"--loathsome expression! But
one grasps in one's haste the cheapest current coin. I commend myself
strongly to the gentlest (no, that's not the word--say the firmest even
while the fairest) of Williams, and am yours, dearest Howard, ever so
yearningly,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/

P.S. I don't know of course in the least what Esher's "operation" may
have been--but I hope not very grave and that he is coming round from
it. I should like to be very kindly remembered to _her_--who shines to
me, from far back, in so amiable a light....




_To Mrs. William James._


/*
Hill, Theydon Mount, Epping.
August 27th, 1911.
*/

/*
Dearest Alice,
*/

I want to write you while I am here--and it helps me (thus putting pen
to paper does) to conjure away the darkness of this black
anniversary--just a little. I have been dreading this day--as I have
been living through this week, as you and Peg will have done, and Bill
not less, under the shadow of all the memories and pangs of a year
ago--but there is a strange (strange enough!) kind of weak anodyne of
association in doing so here, where thanks to your support and
unspeakable charity, utterly and entirely, I got sufficiently better of
my own then deadly visitation of misery to struggle with you on to
Nauheim. I met here at first on coming down a week--nine days--ago
(quite fleeing from the hot and blighted Rye) the assault of all that
miserable and yet in a way helpful vision--but have since been very glad
I came, just as I am glad that you were here then--in spite of
everything.... I am adding day to day here, as you see--partly because
it helps to tide me over a bad--not _physically_ bad--time, and partly
because my admirable and more than ever wonderful hostess puts it so as
a favour to her that I do, that I can only oblige her in memory of all
her great goodness to us--when it _did_ make such a difference--of May
1910. So I daresay I shall stay on for ten or twelve days more (I don't
want to stir, for one thing, till we have had some relief by _water_. It
has now rained in some places, but there has fallen as yet no drop here
or hereabouts--and the earth is sickening to behold.) I have my old
room--and I have paid a visit to yours--which is empty.... Mrs.
Swynnerton is doing an historical picture for a decorative
competition--the embellishment of the Chelsea Town Hall, I believe:
Queen Elizabeth taking refuge (at Chelsea) under an oak during a
thunder-storm, and she finds the great oak here and Mrs. Hunter, in a
wonderful Tudor dress and headgear and red wig, to be admirably, though
too beautifully, the Queen: with the big canvas set up, out of doors, by
the tree, where her marvellous model still finds time, on top of
everything, to _pose_, hooped and ruffled and decorated, and in a most
trying queenly position. Mrs. S. is also doing--finishing--the portrait
of me that she pushed on so last year.

...But goodbye, dearest Alice, dearest all. I hope your Mother is with
you and that Harry has begun to take his holiday--bless him. I bless
your Mother too and send her my affectionate love. Goodbye, dearest
Alice. Your all faithful

/*
HENRY.
*/




_To Mrs. John L. Gardner._


/*
Hill, Theydon Mount, Epping.
September 3rd, 1911.
*/

/*
Dearest Isabella Gardner,
*/

Yes, it has been abominable, my silence since I last heard from you--so
kindly and beautifully and touchingly--during those few last flurried
and worried days before I left America. They were very difficult, they
were very deadly days: I was ill with the heat and the tension and the
trouble, and, amid all the things to be done for the wind-up of a year's
stay, I allowed myself to defer the great pleasure of answering you, yet
the general pain of taking leave of you, to some such supposedly calmer
hour as this.... I fled away from my little south coast habitation a
very few days after reaching it--by reason of the brassy sky, the
shadeless glare and the baked and barren earth, and took refuge among
these supposedly dense shades--yet where also all summer no drop of rain
has fallen. There is less of a glare nevertheless, and more of the
cooling motor-car, and a very vast and beautiful old William and Mary
(and older) house of a very interesting and delightful character, which
has lately come into possession of an admirable friend of mine, Mrs.
Charles Hunter, who tells me that she happily knows you and that you
were very kind and helpful to her during a short visit she made a few
(or several) years ago to America. It is a splendid old house--and
though, in the midst of Epping Forest, it is but a ninety minutes'
motor-ride from London, it's as sequestered and woodlanded as if it were
much deeper in the country. And there are innumerable other interesting
old places about, and such old-world nooks and corners and felicities as
make one feel (in the thick of revolution) that anything that
"happens"--happens disturbingly--to this wonderful little attaching old
England, the ripest fruit of time, can only be a change for the worse.
Even the North Shore and its rich wild beauty fades by comparison--even
East Gloucester and Cecilia's clamorous little bower make a less
exquisite harmony. Nevertheless, I think tenderly even of that bustling
desert now--such is the magic of fond association. George James's
shelter of me in his seaward fastness during those else insufferable
weeks was a mercy I can never forget, and my beautiful day with you from
Lynn on and on, to the lovely climax above-mentioned, is a cherished
treasure of memory. I water this last sweet withered flower in
particular with tears of regret--that we mightn't have had more of them.
I hope your month of August has gone gently and reasonably and that you
have continued to be able to put it in by the sea. I found the salt
breath of that element gave the only savour--or the main one--that my
consciousness knew at those bad times; and if you cultivated it duly and
cultivated sweet peace, into the bargain, as hard as ever you could,
I'll engage that you're better now--and will continue so if you'll only
really take your unassailable _stand_ on sweet peace. You will find in
the depth of your admirable nature more genius and vocation for it than
you have ever let yourself find out--and I hereby give you my blessing
on your now splendid exploitation of that hitherto least attended-to of
your many gardens. Become rich in indifference--to almost everything but
your fondly faithful old

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Mrs. Wharton._

/#
     By "Her" is meant Mrs. Wharton's motor, always referred to by the
     chauffeur as "she."
#/


/*
Lamb House, Rye.
Sept. 27th, 1911.
*/

/*
Dearest Edith,
*/

Alas it is not possible--it is not even for a moment thinkable. I
returned, practically, but last night to my long-abandoned home, where
every earthly consideration, and every desire of my heart, conspires now
to fix me in some sort of recovered peace and stability; I cling to its
very doorposts, for which I have yearned for long months, and the idea
of going forth again on new and distant and expensive adventure fills me
with--let me frankly say--absolute terror and dismay--the desire, the
frantic impulse of scared childhood, to plunge my head under the
bedclothes and burrow there, not to "let it (i.e. _Her_!) get me!" In
fine I _want_ as little to renew the junketings and squanderings of
exile--_time_, priceless time-squanderings as they are for me now--as I
want devoutly much to do something very different, to which I must begin
immediately to address myself--and even if my desire were intense indeed
there would be gross difficulties for me to overcome. But enough--don't
let me pile up the agony of the ungracious--as any failure of response
to a magnificent invitation can only be. Let me simply gape all
admiringly, from a distance, at the splendour of your own spirit and
general resources--or rather let me just simply stay my pen and hide my
head (under the bedclothes before-mentioned.) My finest deepest sense of
the general matter is that the whole economy of my future (in which I
see myself reviving again to certain things, very definite things, that
I want to do) absolutely lays an interdict (to which I oh so fondly
bow!) on my _ever_ leaving these shores again. And I have no scruple of
saying this to you--your beautiful genius being so for great
globe-adventures and putting girdles round the earth. Mine is,
incomparably, for brooding like the Hen, whom I differ from but by a
syllable in designation; and see how little I personally lose by it,
since your putting on girdles so quite inevitably involves your passing
at a given moment where I can reach forth and grab you a little. Don't
despise me for a spiritless worm, only _livrez-vous-y_ yourself ... with
all pride and power, and unroll the rich record later to your so
inevitably deprived (though so basely resigned) and always so faithfully
fond old

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Mrs. Wilfred Sheridan._


/*
Lamb House, Rye.
Oct. 2nd, 1911.
*/

/*
Dear incomparable Child!
*/

What is one to do, how is your poor old battered and tattered
ex-neighbour above all to demean himself in the glittering presence of
such a letter? Yes, I _have_--through the force of dire
accidents--treated you to the most confused and aching void that could
pretend to pass for the mere ghost of conversability, and yet you shine
upon me still with your own sole light--the absolute dazzle of which
very naturally brings tears to my eyes. You are a monster--or
almost!--of magnanimity, as well as beauty and ability and (above all,
clearly) of felicity, and there is nothing for me, I quite recognise,
but to collapse and grovel. Behold me before you worm-like therefore--a
pretty ponderous worm, but still capable of the quiver of sensibility
and quite inoffensively transportable--whether by motor-car or train, or
the local, frugal fly. There is an almost incredible kindness for me in
your and Wilfred's being prepared literally to harbour and nourish, to
exhibit on your bright scene, publicly and all incongruously, so aged
and dingy a parasite; but a real big breezy happiness sometimes begets,
I know, a regular wantonness of charity, a fond extravagance of
altruism, and I surrender myself to the wild experiment with the very
most pious hope that you won't repent of it. You shall not at any point,
I promise you, if the effort on my part decently to grace the splendid
situation can possibly stave it off. I will bravely come then on Friday
27th--arriving, in the afternoon, by any conveyance that you are so good
as to instruct me to adopt. And even as the earthworm might
aspire--occasion offering--to mate with the silkworm, I will gladly
arrange with dear glossy Howard to present myself if possible in _his_
company. I rejoice in your offering me that cherished company, there is
a rare felicity in it: for Howard is the person in all the world who is
kindest to me _next after you_. I shall rejoice to see Wilfred again,
and be particularly delighted to see him as my host; our acquaintance
began a long time ago, but seemed till now to have been blighted by
adversity. This splendidly makes up--and all the good I thought of him
is confirmed for me by his thinking so much good of you. It will thrill
me likewise to see your bower of bliss--a _fester Burg_ in a distracted
world just now, and where I pray that good understandings shall ever
hold their own. It mustn't be difficult to be happy with you and by you,
dear Clare, and you will see how I, for my permitted part, shall pull it
off. I was lately very happy in Scotland--happy for _me_, and for
Scotland!--and it must have been something to do with the fact that (I
being in Forfarshire) you were, or were even about to be, though unknown
to me, in the neighbouring county. This created an atmosphere--over and
above the bonny Scotch; I kind of sniffed your great geniality--from
afar; so you see the kind of good you can't help doing me. It's rapture
to think that you'll do me yet more--at closer quarters, and I am yours,
my dear Clare, all affectionately,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Miss Alice Runnells._

/#
     H. J.'s nephew William, his brother's second son, had just become
     engaged to Miss Runnells.
#/


/*
Lamb House, Rye.
Oct. 4th, 1911.
*/

/*
My very dear Niece,
*/

I must tell you at once all the pleasure your beautiful and generous
letter of the 23rd September has given me. It's a genuine joy to have
from you so straight the delightful truth of the whole matter, and I
can't thank you enough for talking to me with an exquisite young
confidence and treating me as the fond and faithful and intensely
participating old uncle that I want to be. It makes me feel--all you
say--how right I've been to be glad, and how righter still I shall be to
be myself confident. How shall I tell you in return what an interest I
am going to take in you--and how I want you to multiply for me the
occasions of showing it? You see I take the greatest and tenderest
interest in Bill--and you and I feel then exactly together about that.
We shall do--always more or less together!--everything we can think of
to help him and back him up, and we shall find nothing more interesting
and more paying. I expect somehow or other to see a great deal of
him--and of you; and count on you to bring him out to me on the very
first pretext, and on him to bring you. He is splendidly serious and
_entier_; it's a great thing to be as _entier_ as that. And he has great
ability, great possibilities, which will take, and so much reward, all
the bringing out and wooing forth and caring and looking out for that we
can give them--as faith and affection can do these things; though of a
certainty they would go their own way in spite of us--the fine powers
would--if, unluckily for us, they _didn't_ appeal to us. I like to
think of you working out your ideas--planning all those possibilities
together--in the wondrous Chocorua October--where I hope you are staying
to the end--and even if intensity at the studio naturally suffers for
the time it has only fallen back a little to gather again for the
spring. I mean in particular the intensity of which you were the subject
and centre, and which must have at first been somewhat hampered by its
own very excess. Bill's only danger is in his tendency to be intensely
intense--which is a bit of a waste; if one _is_ intense (and it's the
only thing for an artist to be) one should be economically, that is
carelessly and cynically so: in that way one limits the conditions and
tangles of one's problem. But don't give Bill this for a specimen of the
way you and I are going to pull him through: we shall do much better
yet--only it's past, far past, midnight and the deep hush of the little
old sleeping town suggests bed-time rather as the great question for the
moment. I have come back to this admirable small corner with great joy
and profit--and oh, dear Alice, how earnestly you are awaited here at
some not really distant hour by your affectionate old uncle,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Mrs. Frederic Harrison._

/#
     The "small fiction" sent to Mrs. Harrison was _The Outcry_.
#/


/*
Reform Club, Pall Mall, S.W.
Oct. 19, 1911.
*/

/*
Dear Mrs. Harrison,
*/

I am more touched than I can say by your gentle and generous
acknowledgment of the poor little sign of contrition and apology (in the
shape of a slight offered beguilement) that referred to my graceless
silence after the receipt of a beautiful word of sympathy in a great
sorrow months and months ago--I am ashamed to remind you of how many!
You now heap coals of fire, as the phrase is, on my head--and I can
scarcely bear it, for the pure crushing sense of your goodness. I was in
truth, at the time of your other letter, deeply submerged--at once
horribly bereft and very ill physically, but I was really almost as much
touched by the kindness of which yours was a part as I was either. Only
I was unable to do anything at the time in the way of recognition--at
the time or for a long while afterwards; and when at last I did begin to
emerge--after a very difficult year in America which came to an end only
two months ago, my very indebtednesses were paralysing--my long silence
required, to my sore sense, so much explanation. However, I _have_
little by little explained--to some friends; though I think not to those
I count as closest--for such, one feels, are the best comprehenders,
without one's having to tell too much.

I am in town, you see--not at Rye, having gone back there definitely,
three weeks ago, to the questionable experiment of taking up my abode
there for the season to come. The experiment broke down--I can no longer
stand the solitude and confinement, the _immobilisation_, of that
contracted corner in these shortening and darkening weeks and months.
These things have the worst effect upon me--and I fled to London
pavements, lamplights, shopfronts, taxi's--and friends; amid all of
which I have recovered my equilibrium excellently, and shall do so still
more. It means definitely for me no more winters at rueful Rye--only
summers, though I hope plenty of _them_. I go down there, however, for
bits, to keep my small household together--I can't yet, or till I
arrange some frugal footing, bring it up here; and I shall be delighted
to profit by one of those occasions to seek your hospitality in a
neighbourly way for a couple of nights. I shall be eager for this, and
will communicate with you as soon as the opportunity seems to glimmer.
Please express to Frederic Harrison my hearty participation, by sympathy
and sense, in all the fine things that are now so handsomely happening
to him; he is a splendid example and incitement (_ex_citement in fact)
for those climbing the great hill--the hill of the long faith and the
stout staff--just after him, and who see him so little spent and so
erect against the sky at the top. We see you _with_ him, dear Mrs.
Harrison, making scarcely less brave a figure--at least to your very
faithful old friend,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/

P.S. I have it at heart to mention that my small fiction was written two
years ago--in 1909.




_To Miss Theodora Bosanquet._

/#
     On this appeal Miss Bosanquet, H. J.'s amanuensis, secured rooms
     for him in Lawrence Street, Chelsea.
#/


/*
105 Pall Mall, S.W.
October 27th, 1911.
*/

/*
Dear Miss Bosanquet,
*/

Oh if you _could_ only have the real right thing to miraculously propose
to me, you and Miss Bradley, when I see you on Tuesday at 4.30! For you
see, by this bolting in horror and loathing (but don't _repeat_ those
expressions!) from Rye for the winter, my situation suddenly becomes
special and difficult; and largely through this, that having got back to
work and to a very particular job, the need of expressing myself, of
pushing it on, on the old Remingtonese terms, grows daily stronger
within me. But I haven't a seat and temple for the Remington and its
priestess--_can't_ have here at this club, and on the other hand can't
now organize a permanent or regular and continuous footing for the
London winter, which means something unfurnished and taking (_wasting,
now_) time and thought. I want a small, very cheap and very clean
_furnished_ flat or trio of rooms etc. (like the one we talked of under
the King's Cross delusion--only better _and_ with some, a very few,
tables and chairs and fireplaces,) that I could hire for 2 or 3--_3 or
4_--months to drive ahead my job in--the Remington priestess and I
converging and meeting there morning by morning--and it being preferably
nearer to her than to me; though near tubes and things for both of us! I
must keep on _this_ place for food and bed etc.--I have it by the
year--till I really _have_ something else by the year--for winter
purposes--to supersede it (Lamb House abides, for long summers.) Your
researches can have only been for the _un_furnished--but look, _think,
invent_! Two or three decent little tabled and chaired and lighted rooms
would do. I catch a train till Monday, probably late. But on Tuesday!

/*
Yours ever,
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Mrs. William James._

/#
     The book on which H. J. was now at work was _A Small Boy and
     Others_.
#/


/*
The Athenaeum, Pall Mall, S.W.
Nov. 13th, 1911.
*/

/*
Dearest Alice,
*/

I must bless you on the spot for your dear letter of the 22nd--continued
on the 31st. I clutch so at everything that concerns and emanates from
you all that I kind of pine for the need of it all the while--or at any
rate am immensely and positively bettered by every scrap of the dear old
Library life that you can manage to waft over to me.... I find,
naturally, that I can think of you all, and mingle with you so, ever so
much more vividly than I could of old--through the effect of all those
weeks and months of last year--which have had at any rate that happy
result, that I have the constant image of your days and doings. You must
think now very cheerfully and relievedly of mine--because distinctly,
yes, dear brave old London is working my cure. The _conditions_ here
were what I needed all the while that I was so far away from them--I
mean because they are of the kind materially best addressed to helping
me to work my way back to an equilibrium.... I shall see how it
works--from 10.30 to 1.30 each day--and let you hear more; but it
represents the yearning effort really to get, more surely and swiftly
now, up to my neck into the book about William and the rest of us. I
have written to Harry to ask him for certain of the young, youthful
letters (copies of them) which I didn't bring away with me--on the other
hand I have found some six or eight very precious ones mixed up with the
mass of Father's that I have with me (thrust into Father's envelopes
etc.) Of Father's, alas, very few are useable; they are so intensely
domestic, private and personal.

_November 19th._ I find with horror, dearest Alice, that I have
inadvertently left this all these days in my portfolio (interrupted
where I broke off above,) under the impression that I had finished and
posted it. This is dreadful, and I am afraid shows how the beneficent
London, for all its beneficence, does interpose, invade and distract,
giving one too many things to do and to bear in mind at once. What
sickened me is that I have thus kept my letter over a whole wasted
week--so far as being in touch with you all is concerned. On the other
hand this lapse of time enables me blessedly to confirm, in the light of
further experience, whatever of good and hopeful the beginning of the
present states to you....

In the third place a most valued letter from Harry has come,
accompanying a packet of more of William's letters typed, for which I
heartily thank him, and promising me some others yet. I am writing to
him in a very few days, and will then tell him how I am entirely at one
with him about the kind of use to be made by me of all these early
things, the kind of setting they must have, the kind of encompassment
that the book, as _my_ book, my play of reminiscence and almost of
brotherly autobiography, and filial autobiography not less, must
enshrine them in. The book I see and feel will be difficult and
unprecedented and perilous--but if I bring it off it will be exquisite
and unique; bring it off as I inwardly project it and oh so devoutly
desire it. I greatly regret only, also, the almost complete absence of
letters from Alice. She clearly destroyed after Father's death all the
letters she had written to _them_--him and Mother--in absence, and this
was natural enough. But it leaves a perfect blank--though there are on
the other hand all my own intimate memories. Could you see--ask--if
Fanny Morse has kept any? that is just possible. She wrote after all so
little. I marvel that _I_ have none--during the Cambridge years. But she
was so ill that writing was rare for her--_very_ rare. However, I must
end this. I hope the Irving St. winter wears a friendly face for you. I
think so gratefully and kindly now of the little chintzy parlour--blest
refuge. I re-embrace dearest Peg and I do so want some demonstration of
what Aleck is doing. It's a pang to hear from you that he "isn't so
well physically." What does that sadly mean? I send him all my love and
to your mother. Ever your

/*
HENRY.
*/




_To Mrs. Wharton._


/*
Reform Club, Pall Mall, S.W.
Nov. 19th, 1911.
*/

/*
Dearest Edith,
*/

There are scarce degrees of difference in my constant need of hearing
from you, yet when that felicity comes it manages each time to seem
pre-eminent and to have assuaged an exceptional hunger. The pleasure and
relief, at any rate, three days since, were of the rarest quality--and
it's always least discouraging (for the exchange of sentiments) to know
that your wings are for the moment folded and your field a bit
delimited. I knew you were back in Paris as an informer passing hereby
on his way thence again to N.Y. had seen you dining at the Ritz en
nombreuse compagnie, "looking awfully handsome and stunningly dressed."
And Mary Hunter cesjours-ci had given me earlier and more exotic news of
you, yet coloured with a great vividness of sympathy and admiration....
But I feel that it takes a hard assurance to speak to you of "arriving"
anywhere--as that implies starting and continuing, and before your great
heroic rushes and revolutions I can only gape and sigh and sink back. It
requires an association of ease--with the whole heroic question (of the
"up and doing" state)--which I don't possess, to presume to
suggestionise on the subject of a new advent. Great will be the glory
and joy, and the rushing to and fro, when the wide wings are able,
marvellously, to show us symptoms of spreading again--and here I am
(mainly here this winter) to thrill with the first announcement. London
is better for me, during these months, than any other spot of earth, or
of pavement; and even here I seem to find I can work--and n'ai pas
maintenant d'autre idée. Apropos of which aid to life your remarks about
my small latest-born are absolutely to the point. The little creature is
absolutely of the irresistible sex of her most intelligent critic--for I
don't pretend, like Lady Macbeth, to bring forth men-children only. You
speak at your ease, chère Madame, of the interminable and formidable job
of my producing à mon âge another Golden Bowl--the most arduous and
thankless task I ever set myself. However, on all that il y aurait bien
des choses à dire; and meanwhile, I blush to say, the Outcry is on its
way to a fifth edition (in these few weeks), whereas it has taken the
poor old G.B. eight or nine years to get even into a third. And I should
have to go back and live for two continuous years at Lamb House to write
it (living on dried herbs and cold water--for "staying power"--meanwhile;)
and that would be very bad for me, would probably indeed put an end to
me altogether. My own sense is that I don't want, and oughtn't to try,
to attack ever again anything longer (save for about 70 or 80 pages
more) than the Outcry. That is déjà assez difficile--the "artistic
economy" of that inferior little product being a much more calculated
and ciphered, much more cunning and (to use your sweet expression)
crafty one than that of five G.B.'s. The vague verbosity of the
Oxusflood (beau nom!) terrifies me--sates me; whereas the steel
structure of the other form makes every parcelle a weighed and related
value. Moreover nobody is really doing (or, ce me semble, as I look
about, can do) Outcries, while all the world is doing G.B.'s--and
vous-même, chère Madame, tout le premier: which gives you really the cat
out of the bag! My vanity forbids me (instead of the more sweetly
consecrating it) a form in which you run me so close. Seulement alors je
compterais bâtir a great many (a great many, entendezvous?)
Outcries--and on données autrement rich. About this present one hangs
the inferiority, the comparative triviality, of its primal origin. But
pardon this flood of professional egotism. I have in any case got back
to work--on something that now the more urgently occupies me as the time
for me circumstantially to have done it would have been last winter,
when I was insuperably unfit for it, and that is extremely special,
experimental and as yet occult. I apply myself to my effort every
morning at a little repaire in the depths of Chelsea, a couple of little
rooms that I have secured for quiet and concentration--to which our
blest taxi whirls me from hence every morning at 10 o'clock, and where I
meet my amanuensis (of the days of the composition of the G.B.) to whom
I gueuler to the best of my power. In said repaire I propose to crouch
and me blottir (in the English shade of the word, for so intensely
revising an animal, as well) for many, many weeks; so that I fear
dearest Edith, your idea of "whirling me away" will have to adapt itself
to the sense worn by "away"--as it clearly so gracefully will! For there
are senses in which that particle is for me just the most obnoxious
little object in the language. Make your fond use of it at any rate by
first coming away--away hither....

/*
Yours all and always,
HENRY JAMES.
*/

P.S. This was begun five days ago--and was raggedly and ruthlessly
broken off--had to be--and I didn't mark the place this Sunday a.m.
where I took it up again--on page 6th. But I put only today's date--as I
didn't put the other day's at the time.




_To W. E. Norris._


/*
Lamb House, Rye.
January 5th, 1912.
*/

/*
My dear Norris,
*/

I don't know whether to call this a belated or a premature thing; as "a
New Year's offering" (and my hand is tremendously _in_ for those just
now, though it is also tremendously fatigued) it is a bit behind;
whereas for an independent overture it follows perhaps indiscreetly fast
on the heels of my Christmas letter. However, as since this last I have
had the promptest and most beautiful one from you--a miracle of the
perfect "fist" as well as of the perfect ease and grace--I make bold to
feel that I am not quite untimely, that you won't find me so, and I
offer you still all the compliments of the Season--sated and gorged as
you must by this time be with them and vague thin sustenance as they at
best afford. If I hadn't already in the course of the several score of
letters which had long weighed on me and which I really retired to this
place on Dec. 30th to work off as much as anything else, run into the
ground the image of the coming year as the grim, veiled, equivocal and
sinister figure who holds us all in his dread hand and whom we must
therefore grovel and abase ourselves at once on the threshold of, as to
curry favour with him, I would give you the full benefit of it--but I
leave it there as it is; though if you do wish to crawl beside me, here
I am flat on my face. I am putting in a few more days here--in order to
bore if possible _through_ my huge heap of postal obligations, the
accumulation of three or four years, and not very visibly reduced even
by the heroic efforts of the last week. I have never in all my life
written so many letters within the same space of time--and I really
think that is in the full sense of the term documentary proof of my
recovery of a _normal_ senile strength. I go to-morrow over into Kent to
spend Sunday with some friends near Maidstone (they have lately acquired
and extraordinarily restored Allington Castle, which is down in a deep
sequestered bottom, plants its huge feet in the Medway, actually
overflowed, I believe, up to its middle). I come back here again (with
acute lumbago, I quite expect,) and begin again--that is, write 300 more
letters; after which I relapse fondly, and I think very wisely, upon
London. Now that I am not _obliged_ to be in this place (by having so
committed myself to it for better for worse as I had in the past) I find
I quite like it--having enjoyed the deep peace and ease of it this last
week; but I have to go away to prove to myself the non-obligation to
stay, and that takes some doing--which I shall have set about by the
15th. London was quite delicious during that brown still Xmastide--the
four or five days after I wrote to you: the drop of life and of traffic
was beyond anything of the sort I had ever seen in that frame. The
gregariousness of movement of the population is an amazing
phenomenon--they had vanished so in a bunch that the streets were an
uncanny desert, with the difference from of old that the taxis and
motors were more absent than the cabs and carriages and busses ever
were, for at any given moment the horizon is through this power of
disappearance, void of them--whereas the old things _had_, through their
slowness, to hang about. One _gets_ a taxi, by the way, much faster than
one ever got a handsome (lo, I have managed to forget how to _write_ the
extinct object!)--and yet one gets it from so much further away and from
such an at first hopeless void....

Very romantic and charming the arrival of your gallant George--from all
across Europe--for his Xmas eve with you; your account of it touches me
and I find myself ranking you with the celebrated fair of history and
fable for whom the swimmings of the Hellespont and the breakings of the
lance were perpetrated. I congratulate you on such a George in these for
the most part merely "awfully sorry" days, and him on a chance of which
he must have been awfully glad. And àpropos of such felicities--or
rather of felicities pure and simple, and not quite such, I do heartily
hope that you _will_ go on to Spain with your niece in the spring--I'm
convinced that you'll find it a charming adventure. I've myself utterly
ceased to travel--I'm a limpet now, for the rest of my life, on the rock
of Britain, but I intensely enjoy the travels of my friends.

My pen fails and my clock strikes and I am yours all faithfully,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Miss M. Betham Edwards._


/*
Lamb House, Rye,
Jan. 5th, 1912.
*/

/*
Dear Miss Betham Edwards,
*/

I can now at last tell you the sad story of the book for Emily
Morgan--which I am having put up to go to you with this; as well as
explain a little my long silence. The very day, or the very second day,
after last seeing you, a change suddenly took place, under great
necessity, in my then current plans and arrangements; I departed under
that stress for London, practically to spend the winter, and have come
back but for a very small number of days--I return there next week.
"But," you will say, "why didn't you send the promised volume for E. M.
from _London_ then? What matter to us where it came from so long as it
came?" To which I reply: "Well, I had in this house a small row of books
available for the purpose and among which I could choose--also which I
came away, in my precipitation, too soon to catch up in flight. In
London I should have to go and _buy_ the thing, my own production--while
I _have_ two or three bran-new volumes, which will be an economy to a
man utterly depleted by the inordinate number of copies of _The Outcry_
that he has given away and all but six of which he has had to pay
for--his sanguinary (admire my restraint!) publisher allowing him but
six." "Why then couldn't you write home and have one of the books in
question sent you?--or have it sent to Hastings directly from your
house?" "Because I am the happy possessor of a priceless parlourmaid who
_loves_ doing up books, and other parcels, and does them up beautifully,
and if the volume comes to me here, to be inscribed, I shall then have
to do it up myself, an act for which I have absolutely no skill and
which I dread and loathe, and tumble it forth clumsily and insecurely!
Besides I was vague as to which of my works I _did_ have on the
accessible shelf--I only knew I had some--and would have to look and
consider and decide: which I have now punctually done. And the thing
will be beautifully wrapped!" "That's all very well; but why then didn't
you write and explain why it was that you were keeping us unserved and
uninformed?" "Oh, because from the moment I go up to town I
_plunge_--plunge into the great whirlpool of postal matter, social
matter, and above all, this time, grey matter of _cerebration_--having
got back to horrible arrears of work and being at best so _postally_
submerged during these last weeks that every claim of that sort that
could be temporarily dodged was a claim that found me shameless and
heartless." But you see the penalty of all is that I have to write all
_this_ now.

...I'm glad you like adverbs--I adore them; they are the only
qualifications I really much respect, and I agree with the fine author
of your quotations in saying--or in thinking--that the sense for them is
_the_ literary sense. None other is much worth speaking of. But I hope
my volume won't contain too many for Emily Morgan. Don't let her dream
of "acknowledging" it. She can do so when we meet again. Perhaps you can
even help her out with the book by reading, yourself, the Beast in the
Jungle, say--or the Birthplace. May our generally so ambiguous 1912 be
all easy figuring for _you_. Yours, dear Miss Betham Edwards, all
faithfully,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Wilfred Sheridan._

/#
     Mr. and Mrs. Wilfred Sheridan had asked him to be godfather to
     their eldest child.
#/


/*
105 Pall Mall, S.W.
Jan. 12th, 1912.
*/

/*
My dear Wilfred,
*/

Beautiful and touching to me your conjoined appeal, with dear Clare's,
but I beg you to see the matter in the clear and happy light when I say
that I'm afraid it won't do and that the blest Babe must really be
placed, on the threshhold of life (there should be but _one_ h
there--don't teach her to _spell_ by me!) under some more valid and more
charming protection than that of my accumulated and before long so
_concluding_ years. She mustn't be taken, for her first happy holiday,
to visit her late godfather's tomb--as would certainly be the case were
I to lend myself to the fond anachronism her too rosy-visioned parents
so flatteringly propose. You see, dear Wilfred, I speak from a wealth of
wisdom and experience--life has made me rather exceptionally acquainted
with the godpaternal function (so successful an impostor would I seem to
have been,) and it was long since brought home to me that the character
takes more wearing and its duties more performing than I feel I have
ever been able to give it. I have three godchildren living (for to some
I have been fatal)--two daughters and a son; and my conscience tells me
that I have long grossly neglected them. They write me--at considerable
length sometimes, and I just remember that I have one of their last
sweet appeals still unanswered. This, dear Clare and dear Wilfred, is
purely veracious history--a dark chapter in my life. Let me not add
another--let me show at last a decent compunction. Let me not offer up a
helpless and unconscious little career on the altar of my incompetence.
Frankly, the lovely child should find at her font a younger and braver
and nimbler presence, one that shall go on with her longer and become
accessible to her personal knowledge. You will feel this together on
easier reflection--just as you will see how my plea goes hand in hand
with my deep appreciation of your exquisite confidence.

You must indeed, Wilfred, have been through terrific tension--I gathered
from Ethel Dilke's letter that Clare's crisis had been dire; such are
not the hours when a man most feels the privilege and pride of
fatherhood. But I rejoice greatly in the good conditions now, and
already make out that the daughter is to be of prodigious power, beauty
and stature. I feel for that matter that by the time Easter comes I
should drop her straight into the ritual reservoir--with a scandalous
splash. It will take more than me--! (though you may well say you don't
_want_ more--after so many words!) I embrace you all three and am
devotedly yours,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Walter V. R. Berry._

/#
     H. J. never at any time received presents easily, and the
     difficulty seems to have reached a climax over one recently sent
     him by Mr. Berry. It may not be obvious that the gift in question
     was a leather dressing-case.
#/


/*
Lamb House, Rye.
February 8th, 1912.
*/

/*
Très-cher et très-grand ami!
*/

How you must have wondered at my silence! But it has been, alas,
inevitable and now is but feebly and dimly broken. Just after you passed
through London--or rather even _while_ you were passing through it--I
began to fall upon evil days again; a deplorable bout of unwellness
which, making me fit for nothing, gave me a sick struggle, first, in
those awkward Pall Mall conditions, and then reduced me to scrambling
back here as best I might, where I have been these several days but a
poor ineffectual rag. I shall get better here if I can still further
draw on my sadly depleted store of time and patience; but meanwhile I am
capable but of this weak and appealing grimace--so deeply discouraged am
I to feel that there are still, and after I have travelled so far, such
horrid little deep holes for me to tumble into. (This has been a deeper
one than for many months, though I am, I believe, slowly scrambling out;
and blest to me has been the resource of crawling to cover here--for
better aid and comfort.) ... The case has really and largely been,
however, all the while, dearest Walter, that of my having had to yield,
just after your glittering passage in town, to that simply overwhelming
_coup de massue_ of your--well, of your you know what. It was _that_
that knocked me down--when I was just trembling for a fall; it was that
that laid me flat.

_February 14th._ Well, dearest Walter, it laid me after all so flat that
I broke down, a week ago, in the foregoing attempt to do you, and your
ineffable procédé, some manner of faint justice; I wasn't then apt for
any sort of right or worthy approach to you, and there was nothing for
me but resignedly to intermit and _me recoucher_. You had done it with
your own mailed fist--mailed in glittering gold, speciously glazed in
polished, inconceivably and indescribably sublimated, leather, and I had
rallied but too superficially from the stroke. It claimed its victim
afresh, and I have lain the better part of a week just languidly heaving
and groaning as a result _de vos oeuvres_--and forced thereby quite to
neglect and ignore all letters. I am a little more on my feet again, and
if this continues shall presently be able to return to town (Saturday or
Monday;) where, however, the monstrous object will again confront me.
That is the grand fact of the situation--that is the tawny lion,
portentous creature, in my path. I can't get past him, I can't get round
him, and on the other hand he stands glaring at me, refusing to give way
and practically blocking all my future. I can't live with him, you see;
because I can't live _up_ to him. His claims, his pretensions, his
dimensions, his assumptions and consumptions, above all the manner in
which he causes every surrounding object (on my poor premises or within
my poor range) to tell a dingy or deplorable tale--all this makes him
the very scourge of my life, the very blot on my scutcheon. He doesn't
regild that rusty metal--he simply takes up an attitude of gorgeous
swagger, straight in front of all the rust and the rubbish, which makes
me look as if I had stolen _somebody else's_ (re-garnished _blason_) and
were trying to palm it off as my own. Cher et bon Gaultier, I simply
can't _afford_ him, and that is the sorry homely truth. _He is out of
the picture_--out of _mine_; and behold me condemned to live forever
with that canvas turned to the wall. Do you know what that means?--to
have to give up going about at all, lest complications (of the most
incalculable order) should ensue from its being seen what I go about
_with_. Bonne renommée vaut mieux que sac-de-voyage doré, and though I
may have had weaknesses that have brought me a little under public
notice, my modest hold-all (which has accompanied me in most of my
voyage through life) has at least, so far as I know, never _fait jaser_.
All this I have to think of--and I put it candidly to you while yet
there is time. That you shouldn't have counted the cost--to
yourself--that is after all perhaps conceivable (quoiqu'à peine!) but
that you shouldn't have counted the cost to _me_, to whom it spells
ruin: _that_ ranks you with those great lurid, though lovely, romantic
and historic figures and charmers who have scattered their affections
and lavished their favours only (as it has presently appeared) to
consume and to destroy! More prosaically, dearest Walter (if one of the
most lyric acts recorded in history--and one of the most finely
aesthetic, and one stamped with the most matchless grace, _has_ a
prosaic side,) I have been truly overwhelmed by the princely munificence
and generosity of your procédé, and I have gasped under it while tossing
on the bed of indisposition. For a beau geste, c'est le plus beau, by
all odds, of any in all my life ever esquissé in my direction, and it
_has_, as such, left me really and truly panting helplessly after--or
rather quite intensely _before_--it! What is a poor man to do, mon
prince, mon bon prince, mon grand prince, when so prodigiously practised
upon? There is _nothing_, you see: for the proceeding itself swallows at
a gulp, with its open crimson jaws (_such_ a rosy mouth!) like Carlyle's
Mirabeau, "all formulas." One doesn't "thank," I take it, when the
heavens open--that is when the whale of Mr. Allen's-in-the-Strand
celestial shopfront does--and discharge straight into one's lap the
perfect compendium, the very burden of the song, of just what the Angels
have been raving about ever since we first heard of them. Well _may_
they have raved--but I can't, you see; I have to take the case (the
incomparable suit-case) in abject silence and submission. Ah, Walter,
Walter, why do you do these things? they're magnificent, but they're
not--well, discussable or permissible or forgiveable. At least not all
at once. It will take a long, long time. Only little by little and
buckle-hole by buckle-hole, shall I be able to look, with you, even one
strap in the face. As yet a sacred horror possesses me, and I must ask
you to let me, please, though writing you at such length, not so much as
mention the subject. It's better so. Perhaps your conscience will tell
you why--tell you, I mean, that great supreme _gestes_ are only fair
when addressed to those who can themselves gesticulate. I can't--and it
makes me feel so awkward and graceless and poor. I go about trying--so
as to hurl it (something or other) back on you; but it doesn't come
off--practice _doesn't_ make perfect; you are victor, winner, master, oh
irresistible one--you've done it, you've brought it off and got me down
forever, and I must just feel your weight and bear your might to bless
your name--even to the very end of the days of yours, dearest Walter,
all too abjectly and too touchedly,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To W. D. Howells._

/#
     The following "open letter" was written to be read at the dinner
     held in New York in celebration of Mr. Howells's seventy-fifth
     birthday.
#/


/*
105 Pall Mall, S.W.
February 19th, 1912.
*/

/*
My dear Howells,
*/

It is made known to me that they are soon to feast in New York the
newest and freshest of the splendid birthdays to which you keep treating
us, and that your many friends will meet round you to rejoice in it and
reaffirm their allegiance. I shall not be there, to my sorrow, and
though this is inevitable I yet want to be missed, peculiarly and
monstrously missed; so that these words shall be a public apology for my
absence: read by you, if you like and can stand it, but better still
read _to_ you and in fact straight _at_ you, by whoever will be so kind
and so loud and so distinct. For I doubt, you see, whether any of your
toasters and acclaimers have anything like my ground and title for being
with you at such an hour. There can scarce be one, I think, to-day, who
has known you from so far back, who has kept so close to you for so
long, and who has such fine old reasons--so old, yet so well
preserved--to feel your virtue and sound your praise. My debt to you
began well-nigh half a century ago, in the most personal way possible,
and then kept growing and growing with your own admirable growth--but
always rooted in the early intimate benefit. This benefit was that you
held out your open editorial hand to me at the time I began to
write--and I allude especially to the summer of 1866--with a frankness
and sweetness of hospitality that was really the making of me, the
making of the confidence that required help and sympathy and that I
should otherwise, I think, have strayed and stumbled about a long time
without acquiring. You showed me the way and opened me the door; you
wrote to me, and confessed yourself struck with me--I have never
forgotten the beautiful thrill of _that_. You published me at once--and
paid me, above all, with a dazzling promptitude; magnificently, I felt,
and so that nothing since has ever quite come up to it. More than this
even, you cheered me on with a sympathy that was in itself an
inspiration. I mean that you talked to me and listened to me--ever so
patiently and genially and suggestively conversed and consorted with me.
This won me to you irresistibly and made you the most interesting person
I knew--lost as I was in the charming sense that my best friend was an
editor, and an almost insatiable editor, and that such a delicious being
as that was a kind of property of my own. Yet how didn't that interest
still quicken and spread when I became aware that--with such attention
as you could spare from us, for I recognised my fellow beneficiaries--you
had started to cultivate _your_ great garden as well; the tract of
virgin soil that, beginning as a cluster of bright, fresh, sunny and
savoury patches, close about the house, as it were, was to become that
vast goodly pleasaunce of art and observation, of appreciation and
creation, in which you have laboured, without a break or a lapse, to
this day, and in which you have grown so grand a show of--well, really
of everything. Your liberal visits to _my_ plot, and your free-handed
purchases there, were still greater events when I began to see you
handle, yourself, with such ease the key to our rich and inexhaustible
mystery. Then the question of what you would make of your own powers
began to be even more interesting than the question of what you would
make of mine--all the more, I confess, as you had ended by settling this
one so happily. My confidence in myself, which you had so helped me to,
gave way to a fascinated impression of your own spread and growth; for
you broke out so insistently and variously that it was a charm to watch
and an excitement to follow you. The only drawback that I remember
suffering from was that _I_, your original debtor, couldn't print or
publish or pay you--which would have been a sort of ideal _re_payment
and of enhanced credit; you could take care of yourself so beautifully,
and I could (unless by some occasional happy chance or rare favour)
scarce so much as glance at your proofs or have a glimpse of your
"endings." I could only read you, full-blown and finished--and see, with
the rest of the world, how you were doing it again and again.

That then was what I had with time to settle down to--the common
attitude of seeing you do it again and again; keep on doing it, with
your heroic consistency and your noble, genial abundance, during all the
years that have seen so many apparitions come and go, so many vain
flourishes attempted and achieved, so many little fortunes made and
unmade, so many weaker inspirations betrayed and spent. Having myself to
practise meaner economies, I have admired, from period to period, your
so ample and liberal flow; wondered at your secret for doing positively
a little--what do I say a little? I mean a magnificent deal!--of
Everything. I seem to myself to have faltered and languished, to have
missed more occasions than I have grasped, while you have piled up your
monument just by remaining at your post. For you have had the advantage,
after all, of breathing an air that has suited and nourished you; of
sitting up to your neck, as I may say--or at least up to your
waist--amid the sources of your inspiration. There and so you were at
your post; there and so the spell could ever work for you, there and so
your relation to all your material grow closer and stronger, your
perception penetrate, your authority accumulate. They make a great
array, a literature in themselves, your studies of American life, so
acute, so direct, so disinterested, so preoccupied but with the fine
truth of the case; and the more attaching to me, always, for their
referring themselves to a time and an order when we knew together what
American life _was_--or thought we did, deluded though we may have been!
I don't pretend to measure the effect, or to sound the depths, if they
be not the shallows, of the huge wholesale importations and so-called
assimilations of this later time; I can only feel and speak for those
conditions in which, as "quiet observers," as careful painters, as
sincere artists, we could still, in our native, our human and social
element, know more or less where we were and feel more or less what we
had hold of. You knew and felt these things better than I; you had
learnt them earlier and more intimately, and it was impossible, I think,
to be in more instinctive and more informed possession of the general
truth of your subject than you happily found yourself. The _real_ affair
of the American case and character, as it met your view and brushed your
sensibility, that was what inspired and attached you, and, heedless of
foolish flurries from other quarters, of all wild or weak slashings of
the air and wavings in the void, you gave yourself to it with an
incorruptible faith. You saw your field with a rare lucidity; you saw
all it had to give in the way of the romance of the real and the
interest and the thrill and the charm of the common, as one may put it;
the character and the comedy, the point, the pathos, the tragedy, the
particular home-grown humanity under your eyes and your hand and with
which the life all about you was closely interknitted. Your hand reached
out to these things with a fondness that was in itself a literary gift,
and played with them as the artist only and always can play: freely,
quaintly, incalculably, with all the assurance of his fancy and his
irony, and yet with that fine taste for the truth and the pity and the
meaning of the matter which keeps the temper of observation both sharp
and sweet. To observe, by such an instinct and by such reflection, is to
find work to one's hand and a challenge in every bush; and as the
familiar American scene thus bristled about you, so, year by year, your
vision more and more justly responded and swarmed. You put forth A
Modern Instance, and The Rise of Silas Lapham, and A Hazard of New
Fortunes, and The Landlord at Lion's Head, and The Kentons (that
perfectly classic illustration of your spirit and your form,) after
having put forth in perhaps lighter-fingered prelude A Foregone
Conclusion, and The Undiscovered Country, and The Lady of the Aroostook,
and The Minister's Charge--to make of a long list too short a one; with
the effect, again and again, of a feeling for the human relation, as the
social climate of our country qualifies, intensifies, generally
conditions and colours it, which, married in perfect felicity to the
expression you found for its service, constituted the originality that
we want to fasten upon you, as with silver nails, to-night. Stroke by
stroke and book by book your work was to become, for this exquisite
notation of our whole democratic light and shade and give and take, in
the highest degree _documentary_; so that none other, through all your
fine long season, could approach it in value and amplitude. None, let me
say too, was to approach it in essential distinction; for you had grown
master, by insidious practices best known to yourself, of a method so
easy and so natural, so marked with the personal element of your humour
and the play, not less personal, of your sympathy, that the critic kept
coming on its secret connection with the grace of letters much as
Fenimore Cooper's Leather-stocking--so knowing to be able to do
it!--comes, in the forest, on the subtle tracks of Indian braves.
However, these things take us far, and what I wished mainly to put on
record is my sense of that unfailing, testifying truth in you which will
keep you from ever being neglected. The critical intelligence--if any
such fitful and discredited light may still be conceived as within our
sphere--has not at all begun to render you its tribute. The more
inquiringly and perceivingly it shall still be projected upon the
American life we used to know, the more it shall be moved by the
analytic and historic spirit, the more indispensable, the more a vessel
of light, will you be found. It's a great thing to have used one's
genius and done one's work with such quiet and robust consistency that
they fall by their own weight into that happy service. You may remember
perhaps, and I like to recall, how the great and admirable Taine, in one
of the fine excursions of his French curiosity, greeted you as a
precious painter and a sovereign witness. But his appreciation, I want
you to believe with me, will yet be carried much further, and
then--though you may have argued yourself happy, in your generous way
and with your incurable optimism, even while noting yourself not
understood--your really beautiful time will come. Nothing so much as
feeling that he may himself perhaps help a little to bring it on can
give pleasure to yours all faithfully,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Mrs. Wharton._

/#
     The following refers to the third volume (covering the years 1838
     to 1848) of Mme Vladimir Karénine's "George Sand, sa Vie et ses
     OEuvres," an article on which, written by H. J. for the
     _Quarterly Review_, appears in _Notes on Novelists_.
#/


/*
Reform Club, Pall Mall, S.W.
March 13th, 1912.
*/

/*
Dearest Edith,
*/

Just a word to thank you--so inadequately--for everything. Your letter
of the 1st infinitely appeals to me, and the 3d vol. of the amazing
Vladimir (amazing for _acharnement_ over her subject) has rejoiced my
heart the more that I had quite given up expecting it. The two first
vols. had long ago deeply held me--but I had at last had to suppose them
but a colossal fragment. Fortunately the whole thing proves less
fragmentary _than_ colossal, and our dear old George _ressort_ more and
more prodigious the nearer one gets to her. The passages you marked
contribute indeed _most_ to this ineffable effect--and the long letter
to sweet Solange is surely one of the rarest fruits of the human
intelligence, one of the great things of literature. And what a value it
all gets from our memory of that wondrous day when we explored the very
scene where they pigged so thrillingly together. What a crew, what
_moeurs_, what habits, what conditions and relations every way--and
what an altogether mighty and marvellous George!--not diminished by all
the greasiness and smelliness in which she made herself (and _so_ many
other persons!) at home. Poor gentlemanly, crucified Chop!--not
naturally at home in grease--but having been originally _pulled_ in--and
floundering there at last to extinction! _Ce qui dépasse_, however--and
it makes the last word about dear old G. really--is her overwhelming
_glibness_, as exemplified, e.g., in her long letter to Gryzmala (or
whatever his name,) the one to the first page or two of which your
pencil-marks refer me, and in which she "posts" him, as they say at
Stockbridge, as to all her _amours_. To have such a flow of remark on
that subject, and everything connected with it, at her command helps
somehow to make one feel that Providence laid up for the French such a
store of remark, in advance and, as it were, should the worst befall,
that their conduct and _moeurs_, coming _after_, had positively to
justify and do honour to the whole collection of formulae, phrases and,
as I say, glibnesses--so that as there were at any rate such things
there for them to inevitably _say_, why not simply _do_ all the things
that would give them a _rapport_ and a sense? The things _we_, poor
disinherited race, do, we have to do so dimly and sceptically, without
the sense of any such beautiful _cadres_ awaiting us--and therefore
poorly and going but half--or a tenth--of the way. It makes a difference
when you have to invent your suggestions and glosses all after the fact:
you do it so miserably compared with Providence--especially Providence
aided by the French language: which by the way convinces me that
Providence thinks and _really_ expresses itself only in French, the
language of gallantry. It will be a joy when we can next converse on
these and cognate themes--I know of no such link of true interchange as
a community of interest in dear old George.

I don't know what else to tell you--nor where this will find you.... I
kind of pray that you may have been able to make yourself a system of
some sort--to have arrived at some _modus vivendi_. The impossible wears
on us, but we wear a little here, I think, even on the coal-strike and
the mass of its attendant misery; though they produce an effect and
create an atmosphere unspeakably dismal and depressing; to which the
window-smashing women add a darker shade. I am blackly bored when the
latter are at large and at work; but somehow I am still _more_ blackly
bored when they are shut up in Holloway and we are deprived of them....

Yours all and always, dearest Edith,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To H. G. Wells._

/#
     This refers to a proposal (which did not take effect) that Mr.
     Wells should become a member of the lately formed Academic
     Committee of the Royal Society of Literature.
#/


/*
105 Pall Mall, S.W.
March 25th, 1912.
*/

/*
My dear Wells,
*/

Your letter is none the less interesting for being what, alas, I
believed it might be; in spite of which interest--or in spite of which
belief at least--here I am at it again! I know perfectly what you mean
by your indifference to Academies and Associations, Bodies and Boards,
on all this ground of ours; no one should know better, as it is
precisely my own state of mind--really caring as I do for nothing in the
world but lonely patient virtue, which doesn't seek that company.
Nevertheless I fondly hoped that it might end for you as it did, under
earnest invitation, for me--in your having said and felt all those
things _and then joined_--for the general amenity and civility and
unimportance of the thing, giving it the benefit of the doubt--for the
sake of the good-nature. You will say that you _had_ no doubt and
couldn't therefore act on any: but that germ, alas, was what my letter
sought to implant--in addition to its not being a question of your
acting, but simply of your _not_ (that is of your not refusing, but
simply lifting your oar and letting yourself float on the current of
acclamation.) There would be no question of your being entangled or
hampered, or even, I think, of your being bored; the common ground
between all lovers and practitioners of our general form would be under
your feet so _naturally_ and not at all out of your way; and it wouldn't
be you in the least who would have to take a step backward or aside, it
would be _we_ gravitating toward you, melting into your orbit as a mere
more direct effect of the energy of your genius. Your plea of your being
anarchic and seeing your work as such isn't in the least, believe me, a
reason against; for (also believe me) you are essentially wrong about
that! No talent, no imagination, no application of art, as great as
yours, is able not to make much less for anarchy than for a continuity
and coherency much bigger than any disintegration. There's no
representation, no picture (which is your form,) that isn't by its very
nature preservation, association, and of a positive associational
_appeal_--that is the very grammar of it; none that isn't thereby some
sort of interesting or curious _order_: I utterly defy it in short not
to make, all the anarchy in the world aiding, far more than it
unmakes--just as I utterly defy the anarchic to express itself
representationally, art aiding, talent aiding, the play of invention
aiding, in short _you_ aiding, without the grossest, the absurdest
inconsistency. So it is that you are _in_ our circle anyhow you can fix
it, and with us always drawing more around (though always at a
respectful and considerate distance,) fascinatedly to admire and
watch--all to the greater glory of the English name, and the brave, as
brave as possible English array; the latter brave even with the one
American blotch upon it. Oh _patriotism_!--that mine, the mere paying
guest in the house, should have its credit more at heart than its
unnatural, its proud and perverse son! However, all this isn't to worry
or to weary (I wish it _could_!) your ruthlessness; it's only to drop a
sigh on my shattered dream that you might have come among us with as
much freedom as grace. I prolong the sigh as I think how much you might
have done for _our_ freedom--and how little we could do against yours!

Don't answer or acknowledge this unless it may have miraculously moved
you by some quarter of an inch. But then oh _do_!--though I must warn
you that I shall in that case follow it up to the death!

/*
Yours all faithfully,
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Lady Bell._


/*
Reform Club, Pall Mall, S.W.
May 17th, 1912.
*/

/*
My dear Florence Bell,
*/

A good friend of ours--in fact one of our very best--spoke to me here a
few days ago of your having lately had (all unknown to me) a great
tribulation of illness; but also told me, to my lively relief, that you
are getting steadily well again and that (thankful at the worst for
small mercies after such an ordeal) you are in some degree accessible to
the beguilement and consolation of letters. I have only taken time to
wonder whether just such a mercy as _this_ may not be even below the
worst--but am letting the question rest on the basis of my feeling that
you must _never_, and that you _will_ never, dream of any
"acknowledging" of so inevitable a little sign of sympathy. Such dreams,
I too well know, only aggravate and hamper the upward struggle, don't in
the least lighten or quicken it. Take absolute example by me--who had a
very dismal bad illness two and a half years ago (from out of the
blackness of which I haven't even now wholly emerged,) and who reflect
with positive complacency on all my letters, the received ones, of that
time, that still, and that largely always will, remain unanswered. I
want you to be complacent too--though at this rate there won't be much
for you to be so _about_! I really hope you go on smoothly and
serenely--and am glad now that I didn't helplessly know you were so
stricken. But I wish I had for you a few solid chunks of digestible
(that is, mainly good) news--such as, given your constitutional charity,
will melt in your mouth. (There are people for whom only the other sort
is digestible.) But I somehow in these subdued days--I speak of my own
very personal ones--don't _make_ news; I even rather dread breaking out
into it, or having it break into me: it's so much oftener--




_May 26th._ Hill Hall, Theydon Mount, Epping.


I began the above now many days ago, and it was dashed from my hand by a
sudden flap of one of the thousand tentacles of the London day--broken
off short by that aggressive gesture (if the flapping of a tentacle _is_
a conceivable gesture;) and here I take it up again in another place and
at the first moment of any sort of freedom and ease for it. As I read it
over the interruption strikes me as a sort of blessing in disguise, as I
can't imagine what I meant to say in that last portentous sentence, now
doubtless never to be finished, and not in the least deserving it--even
if it can have been anything less than the platitude that the news one
gets is much more usually bad than good, and that as the news one gives
is scarce more, mostly, than the news one has got, so the indigent
state, in that line, is more gracefully worn than the bloated. I must
have meant something better than that. At any rate see how indigent I
am--that with all the momentous things that ought to have happened to
me to explain my sorry lapse (for so many days,) my chronicle would seem
only of the smallest beer. Put it at least that with these humble items
the texture of my life has bristled--even to the effect of a certain
fever and flurry; but they are such matters as would make no figure
among the great issues and processions of Rounton--as I believe that
great order to proceed. The nearest approach to the showy is my having
come down here yesterday for a couple of days--in order not to prevent
my young American nephew and niece (just lately married, and to whom I
have been lending my little house in the country) from the amusement of
it; as, being invited, they yet wouldn't come without my dim
protection--so that I have made, dimly protective, thus much of a dash
into the world--where I find myself quite vividly resigned. It is the
world of the wonderful and delightful Mrs. Charles Hunter, whom you may
know (long my very kind friend;) and all swimming just now in a sea of
music: John Sargent (as much a player as a painter,) Percy Grainger,
Roger Quilter, Wilfred von Glehn, and others; round whose harmonious
circle, however, I roam as in outer darkness, catching a vague glow
through the veiled windows of the temple, but on the whole only
intelligent enough to feel and rue my stupidity--which is quite the
wrong condition. It is a great curse not to be densely enough
indifferent to enough impossible things! Most things are impossible to
me; but I blush for it--can't brazen it out that they are no loss.
Brazening it out is the secret of life--for the _peu doués_. But what
need of that have _you_, lady of the full programme and the rich
performance? What I do enter here (beyond the loving-kindness _de toute
cette jeunesse_) is the fresh illustration of the beauty and amenity and
ancientry of this wondrous old England, which at twenty miles or so
from London surrounds this admirable and interesting and historic house
with a green country as wide and free, and apparently as sequestered,
and strikingly as rural--in the Constable way--as if it were on the
other side of the island. But I leave it to-morrow to go back to town
till (probably) about July 1st, before which I fondly hope you may be so
firm on your feet as to be able to glide again over those beautiful
parquets of 95. In that case I shall be so delighted to glide in upon
you--assuming my balance preserved--at some hour gently appointed by
yourself. Then I shall tell you more--if you can stand more after
this--fourteen sprawling and vacuous pages. (Alas, I am but _too_ aware
there is nothing in them; nothing, that is, but the affectionate
fidelity, with every blessing on your further complete healing, of)
yours all constantly,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Mrs. W. K. Clifford._

/#
     On May 7, 1912, the Academic Committee of the Royal Society of
     Literature celebrated the centenary of the birth of Robert
     Browning. H. J. read a paper on "The Novel in _The Ring and the
     Book_," afterwards included in _Notes on Novelists_. In an
     appreciative notice of the occasion in the _Pall Mall Gazette_ Mr.
     Filson Young described his voice as "old."
#/


/*
Reform Club, Pall Mall, S.W.
May 18th, 1912.
*/

/*
Dearest Lucy!
*/

Your impulse to steep me, and hold me down under water, in the Fountain
of Youth, with Charles Boyd muscularly to help you, is no less beautiful
than the expression you have given it, by which I am more touched than I
can tell you. I take it as one of your constant kindnesses--but I had,
all the same, I fear, taken Filson Young's Invidious Epithet (in that
little compliment) as inevitable, wholly, though I believe it was mainly
applied to my _voice_. My voice _was_ on that Centenary itself
Centenarian--for reasons that couldn't be helped--for I really that day
wasn't fit to speak. As for one's own sense of antiquity, my own, what
is one to say?--it varies, goes and comes; at times isn't there at all
and at others is quite sufficient, thank you! I cultivate not thinking
about it--and yet in certain ways I like it, like the sense of having
had a great deal of life. The young, on the whole, make me pretty
sad--the old themselves don't. But the _pretension_ to youth is a thing
that makes me saddest and oldest of all; the _acceptance_ of the fact
that I am all the while growing older on the other hand decidedly
rejuvenates me; I say "what then?" and the answer doesn't come, there
doesn't seem to be any, and that quite sets me up. So I am young
_enough_--and you are magnificent, simply: I get from you the sense of
an inexhaustible vital freshness, and your voice is the voice (so
beautiful!) of your twentieth year. Your going to America was admirably
young--an act of your twenty-fifth. Don't _be_ younger than that; don't
seem a year younger than you do seem; for in that case you will have
quite withdrawn from my side. Keep up with me a _little_. I shall come
to see you again at no distant day, but the coming week seems to have
got itself pretty well encumbered, and on the 24th or 26th I go to Rye
for four or five days. After that I expect to be in town quite to the
end of June. I am reading the Green Book in bits--as it were--the only
way in which I _can_ read (or at least do read the contemporary
novel--though I read so very few--almost none.) My only way of
reading--apart from that--is to imagine myself _writing_ the thing
before me, treating the subject--and thereby often differing from the
author and his--or _her_--way. I find G. W. very brisk and alive, but I
_have_ to take it in pieces, or liberal sips, and so have only reached
the middle. What I feel critically (and I can feel about anything of the
sort but critically) is that you don't _squeeze_ your material hard and
tight enough, to press out of its ounces and inches what they will give.
That material lies too loose in your hand--or your hand, otherwise
expressed, doesn't tighten round it. That is the fault of all fictive
writing now, it seems to me--that and the inordinate abuse of
dialogue--though this but one effect of the not squeezing. It's a wrong,
a disastrous and unscientific economy altogether. _I_ squeeze as I read
you--but that, as I say, is rewriting! However, I will tell you more
when I have eaten all the pieces. And I shall love and stick to you
always--as your old, very old, _oldest_ old

/*
H. J.
*/




_To Hugh Walpole._


/*
Reform Club, Pall Mall, S.W.
May 19th, 1912.
*/

...Your letter greatly moves and regales me. Fully do I enter into your
joy of sequestration, and your bliss of removal from this scene of
heated turmoil and dusty despair--which, however, re-awaits you! Never
mind; sink up to your neck into the brimming basin of nature and peace,
and teach yourself--by which I mean let your grandmother teach you--that
with each revolving year you will need and make more piously these
precious sacrifices to Pan and the Muses. History eternally repeats
itself, and I remember well how in the old London years (of _my_ old
London--_this_ isn't that one) I used to clutch at these chances of
obscure flight and at the possession, less frustrated, of my soul, my
senses and my hours. So keep it up; I miss you, little as I see you even
when here (for I _feel_ you more than I see you;) but I surrender you at
whatever cost to the beneficent powers. Therefore I rejoice in the
getting on of your work--how splendidly copious your flow; and am much
interested in what you tell me of your readings and your literary
emotions. These latter indeed--or some of them, as you express them, I
don't think I fully share. At least when you ask me if I don't feel
Dostoieffsky's "mad jumble, that flings things down in a heap," nearer
truth and beauty than the picking and composing that you instance in
Stevenson, I reply with emphasis that I feel nothing of the sort, and
that the older I grow and the more I _go_ the more sacred to me do
picking and composing become--though I naturally don't limit myself to
Stevenson's _kind_ of the same. Don't let any one persuade you--there
are plenty of ignorant and fatuous duffers to try to do it--that
strenuous selection and comparison are not the very essence of art, and
that Form _is_ [not] substance to that degree that there is absolutely
no substance without it. Form alone _takes_, and holds and preserves,
substance--saves it from the welter of helpless verbiage that we swim in
as in a sea of tasteless tepid pudding, and that makes one ashamed of an
art capable of such degradations. Tolstoi and D. are fluid puddings,
though not tasteless, because the amount of their own minds and souls in
solution in the broth gives it savour and flavour, thanks to the strong,
rank quality of their genius and their experience. But there are all
sorts of things to be said of them, and in particular that we see how
great a vice is their lack of composition, their defiance of economy and
architecture, directly they are emulated and imitated; _then_, as
subjects of emulation, models, they quite give themselves away. There is
nothing so deplorable as a work of art with a _leak_ in its interest;
and there is no such leak of interest as through commonness of form. Its
opposite, the _found_ (because the sought-for) form is the absolute
citadel and tabernacle of interest. But what a lecture I am reading
you--though a very imperfect one--which you have drawn upon yourself (as
moreover it was quite right you should.) But no matter--I shall go for
you again--as soon as I find you in a lone corner....

Well, dearest Hugh, love me a little better (if you _can_) for this
letter, for I am ever so fondly and faithfully yours,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Miss Rhoda Broughton._


/*
Reform Club, Pall Mall, S.W.
June 2nd, 1912.
*/

/*
My dear Rhoda,
*/

Too many days have elapsed since I got your kind letter--but London days
do leak away even for one who punily tries to embank and economise
them--as I do; they fall, as it were, from--or, better still, they
utterly dissolve _in_--my nerveless grasp. In that enfeebled clutch the
pen itself tends to waggle and drop; and hence, in short, my appearance
of languor over the inkstand. This is a dark moist Sunday a.m., and I
sit alone in the great dim solemn library of this Club (Thackeray's
Megatherium or whatever,) and say to myself that the conditions now at
last _ought_ to be auspicious--though indeed that merely tends to make
me but brood inefficiently over the transformations of London as such
scenes express them and as I have seen them go on growing. Now at last
the place becomes an utter void, a desert peopled with ghosts, for all
except three days (about) of the week--speaking from the social point of
view. The old Victorian _social_ Sunday is dust and ashes, and a holy
stillness, a repudiating blankness, has possession--which however, after
all, has its merits and its conveniences too.... Cadogan Gardens,
meanwhile, know me no more--the region has turned to sadness, as if,
with your absence, all the blinds were down, and I now have no such
confident and cordial afternoon refuge left. Very promptly, next winter,
the blinds must be up again, and I will keep the tryst. I have been
talking of you this evening with dear W. E. Norris, who is paying one of
his much interspaced visits to town and has dined with me, amiably,
without other attractions. (This letter, begun this a.m. and
interrupted, I take up again toward midnight.) ...

Good-night, however, now--I must stagger (really from the force of too
total an abstinence) to my never-unappreciated couch. (Norris dined on a
bottle of soda-water and I on no drop of anything.) I pray you be
bearing grandly up, and I live in the light of your noble fortitude. One
is always the better for a great example, and I am always all-faithfully
yours,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Henry James, junior._


/*
Lamb House, Rye.
July 16th, 1912.
*/

/*
Dearest Harry,
*/

...I came down here from town but five days ago, and feel intensely,
after so long an absence, the blest, the invaluable, little old
refuge-quality of dear L. H. at this and kindred seasons. A tremendous
wave of heat is sweeping over the land--passed on apparently from "your
side"--and I left London a fiery furnace and the Reform Club a feather
bed on top of one in the same. The visitation still goes on day after
day, but, with immense mitigation, I can bear it here--where nothing
could be more mitigating than my fortunate conditions.

...The "working expensively" meanwhile signifies for me simply the
"literary and artistic," the technical, side of the matter--the fact
that in doing this book I am led, by the very process and action of my
idiosyncrasy, on and on into more evocation and ramification of old
images and connections, more intellectual and moral autobiography
(though all closely and, as I feel it, exquisitely associated and
involved,) than I shall quite know what to do with--to do with, that is,
in this book (I shall doubtless be able to use rejected or suppressed
parts in some other way.) It's my more and more (or long since
established) difficulty always, that I have to project and _do_ a great
deal in order to choose from that, after the fact, what is most
designated and supremely urgent. That is a costly way of working, as
regards time, material etc.--at least in the short run. In the long run,
and "by and large," it, I think, abundantly justifies itself. That is
really all I meant to convey to you and to your mother through Bill--as
a kind of precaution and forewarning--for your inevitable sense of my
"slowness." Of course too I have had pulls up and breaks, sometimes
disheartening ones, through the recurrence of bad physical
conditions--and am still liable, strictly speaking, to these. But the
main thing to say about these, once for all, is that they tend steadily,
and most helpfully, to diminish, both in intensity and in duration, and
that I have really now reached the point at which the successful effort
to work really helps me physically--to say nothing of course of (a
thousand times) morally. It remains true that I do worry about the
money-question--by nature and fate (since I was born worrying, though
myself much more than others!)--and that this is largely the result of
these last years of lapse of productive work while my expenses have gone
more or less (while I was with you all in America less!) ruthlessly on.
But of this it's also to be cheeringly said that I have only to be
successfully and continuously at work for a period of about ten days for
it all to fall into the background altogether (all the worry,) and be
replaced by the bravest confidence of calculation. So much for _that_!
And now, for the moment--for this post at least, I must pull up. Well of
course do I understand that with your big new preoccupations and duties
close at hand you mayn't dream of a move in this direction, and I should
be horrified at seeming to exert the least pressure toward your even
repining at it. More still than the delight of seeing you will be that
of knowing that you are getting into close quarters with your new job. I
repeat that you have no idea of the good this will do me!--as to which I
sit between your Mother and Peg, clasping a hand of each, while we watch
your every movement and gloat, ecstatically, over you. Oh, give my love
so aboundingly to them, and to your grandmother, on it all!

Yours, dearest Harry, more affectionately than ever,

/*
H. J.
*/




_To R. W. Chapman._

/#
     Mrs. Brookenham is of course the mother of the young heroine of
     _The Awkward Age_.
#/


/*
Lamb House, Rye.
July 17th, 1912.
*/

/*
Dear Mr. Chapman,
*/

I very earnestly beg you not to take as the measure of the pleasure
given me by your letter the inordinate delay of this acknowledgment.
That admirable communication, reaching me at the climax of the London
June, found me in a great tangle of difficulties over the command of my
time and general conduct of my correspondence and other obligations; so
that after a vain invocation of a better promptness where you were
concerned, I took heart from the fact that I was soon to be at peace
down here, and that hence I should be able to address you at my ease. I
have in fact been here but a few days, and my slight further delay has
but risen from the fact that I brought down with me so _many_ letters to
answer!--though none of them, let me say, begins to affect me with the
beauty and interest of yours.

I am in truth greatly touched, deeply moved by it. What is one to say or
do in presence of an expression so generous and so penetrating? I can
only listen very hard, as it were, taking it all in with bowed head and
clasped hands, not to say moist eyes even, and feel that--well, that the
whole thing _has_ been after all worth while then. But one is simply in
the _hands_ of such a reader and appreciator as you--one yields even
assentingly, gratefully and irresponsibly to the current of your story
and consistency of your case. I feel that I really don't know much--as
to what your various particulars imply--save that you are delightful,
are dazzling, and that you must be beautifully right as to any view that
you take of anything. Let me say, for all, that if you think so, so it
must be; for clearly you see and understand and discriminate--while one
is at the end of time one's self so very vague about many things and
only conscious of one's general virtuous intentions and considerably
strenuous effort. What one has done has been conditioned and related and
involved--so to say, fatalised--every element and effort jammed up
against some other necessity or yawning over some consequent void--and
with anything good in one's achievement or fine in one's faculty
conscious all the while of having to _pay_ by this and that and the
other corresponding dereliction or weakness. You let me off, however, as
handsomely as you draw me on, and I see you as absolutely right about
everything and want only to square with yours _my_ impression: that is
to say any but that of my being "dim" in respect to some of the aspects,
possibly, of Mrs. Brookenham--which I don't think I am: I really think I
could stand a stiff cross-examination on that lady. But this is a
detail, and I can meet you only in a large and fond pre-submission on
the various points you make. I greatly wish our contact at Oxford the
other day had been less hampered and reduced--so that it was impossible,
in the event, altogether, to get within hail of you at Oriel. But I have
promised the kind President of Magdalen another visit, and then I shall
insist on being free to come and see you if you will let me. I cherish
your letter and our brief talk meanwhile as charmingly-coloured lights
in the total of that shining occasion. What power to irradiate has
Oxford at its best!--and as it was, the other week, so greatly at that
best. I _think_ the gruesome little errors of text you once so devotedly
noted for me in some of my original volumes don't for the most part
survive in the collective edition--but though a strenuous I am a
constitutionally fallible proof-reader, and I am almost afraid to assure
myself. However, I must more or less face it, and I am yours, dear Mr.
Chapman, all gratefully and faithfully,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Hugh Walpole._


/*
Lamb House, Rye.
Aug. 14th, 1912.
*/

...I rejoice that you wander to such good purpose--by which I mean
nothing more exemplary that that you apparently live in the light of
curiosity and cheer. I'm very glad for you that these gentle passions
have the succulent scene of Munich to pasture in. I haven't been there
for long years--was never there but once at all, but haven't forgotten
how genial and sympathetic I found it. Drink deep of every impression
and have a lot to tell me when the prodigal returns. I love travellers'
tales--especially when I love the traveller; therefore have plenty to
thrill me and to confirm that passion withal. I travel no further than
this, and never shall again; but it serves my lean purposes, or most of
them, and I'm thankful to be able to do so much and to feel even these
quiet and wholesome little facts about me. We're having in this rude
climate a summer of particularly bad and brutal manners--so far the
sweetness of the matter fails; but I get out in the lulls of the tempest
(it does nothing but rain and rage,) and when I'm within, my mind still
to me a kingdom is, however dismembered and shrunken. I haven't seen a
creature to talk of _you_ with--but I see on these terms very few
creatures indeed; none worth speaking of, still less worth talking to.
Clearly _you_ move still in the human maze--but I like to think of you
there; may it be long before you find the clue to the exit. You say
nothing of any return to _these_ platitudes, so I suppose you are to be
still a good while on the war-path; but when you are ready to smoke the
pipe of peace come and ask _me_ for a light. It's good for you to have
read Taine's English Lit.; he lacks saturation, lacks _waste_ of
acquaintance, but sees with a magnificent objectivity, reacts with an
energy to match, expresses with a splendid amplitude, and has just the
critical value, I think, of being so off, so _far_ (given such an
intellectual reach,) and judging and feeling in so different an air.
It's charming to me to hear that _The Ambassadors_ have again engaged
and still beguile you; it is probably a very _packed_ production, with a
good deal of one thing within another; I remember sitting on it, when I
wrote it, with that intending weight and presence with which you
probably often sit in these days on your trunk to make the lid close and
_all_ your trousers and boots go in. I remember putting in a good deal
about Chad and Strether, or Strether and Chad, rather; and am not sure
that I quite understand what in that connection you miss--I mean in the
way of what _could_ be there. The whole thing is of course, to
intensity, a picture of relations--and among them is, though not on the
first line, the relation of Strether to Chad. The relation of Chad to
Strether is a limited and according to my method only implied and
indicated thing, sufficiently there; but Strether's to Chad consists
above all in a charmed and yearning and wondering sense, a dimly envious
sense, of all Chad's young living and easily-taken _other_ relations;
other not only than the one to him, but than the one to Mme de Vionnet
and whoever else; this very sense, and the sense of Chad, generally, is
a part, a large part, of poor dear Strether's discipline, development,
adventure and general history. All of it that is of my subject seems to
me given--given by dramatic projection, as all the rest is given: how
can you say I do anything so foul and abject as to "state"? You deserve
that I should condemn you to read the book over once again! However,
instead of this I only impose that you come down to me, on your return,
for a couple of days--when we can talk better. I hold you to the heart
of your truest old

/*
H. J.
*/




_To Edmund Gosse._

/#
     With regard to the "dread effulgence of their Lordships" it will be
     remembered that Mr. Gosse was at this time Librarian of the House
     of Lords. The allusion at the end is to Mr. Gosse's article on
     Swinburne in the _Dictionary of National Biography_, further dealt
     with in the next letter.
#/


_Dictated._

/*
Lamb House, Rye.
7th October, 1912.
*/

/*
My dear Gosse,
*/

Forgive this cold-blooded machinery--for I have been of late a stricken
man, and still am not on my legs; though judging it a bit urgent to
briefly communicate with you on a small practical matter. I have had
quite a Devil of a summer, a very bad and damnable July and August,
through a renewal of an ailment that I had regarded as a good deal
subdued, but that descended upon me in force just after I last saw you
and then absolutely raged for many weeks. (I allude to a most deplorable
tendency to chronic pectoral, or, more specifically, anginal, pain;
which, however, I finally, about a month ago, got more or less the
better of, in a considerably reassuring way.) I was but beginning to
profit by this comparative reprieve when I was smitten with a violent
attack of the atrocious affection known as "Shingles"--my impression of
the nature of which had been vague and inconsiderate, but to the now
grim shade of which I take off my hat in the very abjection of respect.
It has been a very horrible visitation, but I am getting better; only I
am still in bed and have to appeal to you in this graceless mechanical
way. My appeal bears on a tiny and trivial circumstance, the fact that I
have practically concluded an agreement for a Flat which I saw and liked
and seemed to find within my powers before leaving town (No. 21 Carlyle
Mansions, Cheyne Walk, S.W.) and which I am looking to for a more
convenient and secure basis of regularly wintering in London, for the
possibly brief remainder of my days, than any I have for a long time
had. I want, in response to a letter just received from the proprietors
of the same, to floor that apparently rather benighted and stupid body,
who are restless over the question of a "social reference" (in addition
to my reference to my Bankers), by a regular knock-down production of
the most eminent and exalted tie I can produce; whereby I have given
them your distinguished name as that of a voucher for my
respectability--as distinguished from my solvency; for which latter I
don't hint that you shall, however dimly, engage! So I have it on my
conscience, you see, to let you know of the liberty I have thus taken
with you; this on the chance of their really applying to you (which some
final saving sense of their being rather silly may indeed keep them from
doing.) If they do, kindly, very kindly, abound in my sense to the
extent of intimating to them that not to know me famed for my
respectability is scarcely to be respectable themselves! That is all I
am able to trouble you with now. I am as yet a poor thing, more even the
doctor's than mine own; but shall come round presently and shall then be
able to give you a better account of myself. There is no question of my
getting into the Flat in question till some time in January; I don't get
possession till Dec. 25th, but this preliminary has had to be settled.
Don't be burdened to write; I know your cares are on the eve of
beginning again, and how heavy they may presently be. I have only
wanted to create for our ironic intelligence the harmless pleasure of
letting loose a little, in a roundabout way, upon the platitude of the
City and West End Properties Limited, the dread effulgence of their
Lordships; the latter being the light and you the transparent lantern
that my shaky hand holds up. More, as I say, when that hand is less
shaky. I hope all your intimate news is good, and am only waiting for
the new vol. of the Dictionary with your Swinburne, which a word from
Sidney Lee has assured me is of maximum value. All faithful greeting.

/*
Yours always,
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Edmund Gosse._


_Dictated._

/*
Lamb House, Rye.
October 10th, 1912.
*/

/*
My dear Gosse,
*/

Your good letter of this morning helps to console and sustain. One
really needs any lift one can get after this odious experience. I am
emerging, but it is slow, and I feel much ravaged and bedimmed.
Fortunately these days have an intrinsic beauty--of the rarest and
charmingest here; and I try to fling myself on the breast of Nature
(though I don't mean by that fling myself and my poor blisters and scars
on the dew-sprinkled lawn) and forget, imperfectly, that precious hours
and days tumble unrestrained into the large round, the deep dark, the
ever open, hole of sacrifice. I am almost afraid my silly lessors of the
Chelsea Flat _won't_ apply to you for a character of me if they haven't
done so by now; afraid because the idea of a backhander from you,
reaching them straight, would so gratify my sense of harmless sport. It
was only a question of a word in case they _should_ appeal; kindly don't
dream of any such if they let the question rest (in spite indeed of
their having intimated that they would thoroughly thresh it out.)

I received with pleasure the small Swinburne--of so chaste and charming
a form; the perusal of which lubricated yesterday two or three rough
hours. Your composition bristles with items and authenticities even as a
tight little cushion with individual pins; and, I take it, is everything
that such a contribution to such a cause should be but for the not quite
ample enough (for my appetite) conclusive estimate or appraisement. I
know how little, far too little, to my sense, that element has figured
in those pages in general; but I should have liked to see you, in spite
of this, formulate and resume a little more the creature's character and
genius, the aspect and effect of his general performance. You will say I
have a morbid hankering for what a Dictionary doesn't undertake, what a
Sidney Lee perhaps even doesn't offer space for. I admit that I talk at
my ease--so far as ease is in my line just now. Very charming and happy
Lord Redesdale's contribution--showing, afresh, how _everything_ about
such a being as S. becomes and remains interesting. Prettily does
Redesdale write--and prettily will ---- have winced; if indeed the
pretty even in that form, or the wincing in any, could be conceived of
him.

I have received within a day or two dear old George Meredith's Letters;
and, though I haven't been able yet very much to go into them, I catch
their emanation of something so admirable and, on the whole, so baffled
and tragic. We must have more talk of them--and also of Wells' book,
with which however I am having extreme difficulty. I am not so much
struck with its hardness as with its weakness and looseness, the utter
going by the board of any real self-respect of composition and of
expression.... What lacerates me perhaps most of all in the Meredith
volumes is the meanness and poorness of editing--the absence of any
attempt to project the Image (of character, temper, quantity and quality
of mind, general size and sort of personality) that such a subject cries
aloud for; to the shame of our purblind criticism. For such a Vividness
to go a-begging!-- ... When one thinks of what Vividness would in
France, in such a case, have leaped to its feet in commemorative and
critical response! But there is too much to say, and I am able, in this
minor key, to say too little. We must be at it again. I was afraid your
wife was having another stretch of the dark valley to tread--I had heard
of your brother-in-law's illness. May peace somehow come! I re-greet and
regret you all, and am all faithfully yours,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Edmund Gosse._


_Dictated._

/*
Lamb House, Rye.
October 11th, 1912.
*/

/*
My dear Gosse,
*/

Let me thank you again, on this lame basis though I still be, for the
charming form of your news of your having helped me with my fastidious
friends of the Flat. Clearly, they were to be hurled to their doom; for
the proof of your having, with your potent finger, pressed the merciless
spring, arrives this morning in the form of a quite obsequious request
that I will conclude our transaction by a signature. This I am doing,
and I am meanwhile lost in fond consideration of the so susceptible spot
(susceptible to profanation) that I shall have reached only after such
purgations. I thank you most kindly for settling the matter.

Very interesting your note--in the matter of George Meredith. Yes, I
spent much of yesterday reading the Letters, and quite agree with your
judgment of them on the score of their rather marked non-illustration of
his intellectual wealth. They make one, it seems to me, enormously
_like_ him--but that one had always done; and the series to Morley, and
in a minor degree to Maxse, contain a certain number of rare and fine
things, many beautiful felicities of wit and vision. But the whole
aesthetic range, understanding that in a big sense, strikes me as meagre
and short; he clearly lived even less than one had the sense of his
doing in the world of art--in that whole divine preoccupation, that
whole intimate restlessness of projection and perception. And this is
the more striking that he appears to have been far more communicative
and overflowing on the whole ground of what he was doing in prose or
verse than I had at all supposed; to have lived and wrought with all
those doors more open and publicly slamming and creaking on their
hinges, as it were, than had consorted with one's sense, and with the
whole legend, of his intellectual solitude. His whole case is full of
anomalies, however, and these volumes illustrate it even by the light
they throw on a certain poorness of range in most of his correspondents.
Save for Morley (et encore!) most of them figure here as folk too little
à la hauteur--! though, of course, a man, even of his distinction, can
live and deal but with those who are within his radius. He was
_starved_, to my vision, in many ways--and that makes him but the more
nobly pathetic. In fine the whole moral side of him throws out some
splendidly clear lights--while the "artist," the secondary Shakespeare,
remains curiously dim. Your missing any letters to me rests on a
misconception of my very limited, even though extremely delightful to
me, active intercourse with him. I had with him no sense of reciprocity;
he remained for me always a charming, a quite splendid and rather
strange, Exhibition, so content itself to _be_ one, all genially and
glitteringly, but all exclusively, that I simply sat before him till the
curtain fell, and then came again when I felt I should find it up. But I
never _rang_ it up, never felt any charge on me to challenge him by
invitation or letter. But one or two notes from him did I find when Will
Meredith wrote to me; and these, though perfectly charming and kind, I
have preferred to keep unventilated. However, I am little enough
observing that same discretion to _you_--! I slowly mend, but it's
absurd how far I feel I've to come back from. Sore and strained has the
horrid business left me. But nevertheless I hope, and in fact almost
propose.

/*
Yours all faithfully,
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Edmund Gosse._

/#
     _The Morning Post_ article was a review by Mr. Gosse of the
     _Letters of George Meredith_.
#/


_Dictated._

Lamb House, Rye.

October 13th, 1912. */

/*
My dear Gosse,
*/

This is quite a feverish flurry of correspondence--but please don't for
a moment feel the present to entail on you the least further charge: I
only want to protest against your imputation of sarcasm to my figure of
the pin-cushion and the pins--and this all genially: that image having
represented to myself the highest possible tribute to your biographic
_facture_. What I particularly meant was that probably no such tense
satin slope had ever before grown, within the same number of square
inches, so dense a little forest of discriminated upright stems! There
you are, and I hear with immense satisfaction of the prospect of another
crop yet--this time, I infer, on larger ground and with beautiful alleys
and avenues and vistas piercing the plantation.

I rejoice alike to know of the M.P. article, on which I shall be able to
put my hand here betimes tomorrow. I can't help wishing I had known of
it a little before--I should have liked so to bring, in time, a few of
my gleanings to your mill. But evidently we are quite under the same
general impression, and your point about the dear man's confoundingness
of allusion to the products of the French spirit is exactly what one had
found oneself bewilderedly noting. There are two or three rather big
felicities and sanities of judgment (in this order;) in one place a fine
strong rightly-discriminated apprehension and characterisation of Victor
Hugo. But for the rest such queer lapses and wanderings wild; with the
striking fact, above all, that he scarcely once in the 2 volumes makes
use of a French phrase or ventures on a French passage (as in sundry
occasional notes of acknowledgment and other like flights,) without some
marked inexpertness or gaucherie. Three or four of these things are even
painful--they cause one uncomfortably to flush. And he appears to have
gone to France, thanks to his second wife's connections there, putting
in little visits and having contacts, of a scattered sort, much oftener
than I supposed. He "went abroad," for that matter, during certain
years, a good deal more than I had fancied him able to--which is an
observation I find, even now, of much comfort. But one's impression of
his lack of what it's easiest to call, most comprehensively, aesthetic
curiosity, is, I take it, exactly what you will have expressed your
sense of. He speaks a couple of times of greatly admiring a novel of
Daudet's, "Numa Roumestan," with the remark, twice over, that he has
never "liked" any of the others; he only "likes" this one! The tone is
of the oddest, coming from a man of the craft--even though the terms on
which he himself was of the craft remain so peculiar--and such as there
would be so much more to say about. To a fellow-novelist who could read
Daudet at all (and I can't imagine his not, in such a relation, being
read with curiosity, with critical appetite) "Numa" might very well
appear to stand out from the others as the finest flower of the same
method; but not to take it as one of them, or to take them as of its
family and general complexion, is to reduce "liking" and not-liking to
the sort of use that a spelling-out schoolgirl might make of them. Most
of all (if I don't bore you) I think one particular observation
counts--or has counted for me; the fact of the non-occurrence of one
name, _the_ one that aesthetic curiosity would have seemed scarce able,
in any real overflow, to have kept entirely shy of; that of Balzac, I
mean, which Meredith not only never once, even, stumbles against, but so
much as seems to stray within possible view of. Of course one would
never dream of measuring "play of mind," in such a case, by any man's
positive mentions, few or many, of the said B.; yet when he _isn't_ ever
mentioned a certain desert effect comes from it (at least it does to
thirsty me) and I make all sorts of little reflections. But I am making
too many now, and they are loose and casual, and you mustn't mind them
for the present; all the more that I'm sorry to say I am still on shaky
ground physically; this odious ailment not being, apparently, a thing
that spends itself and clears off, but a beastly poison which hangs
about, even after the most copious eruption and explosion, and suggests
dismal relapses and returns to bed. I am really thinking of this latter
form of relief even now--after having been up but for a couple of hours.
However, don't "mind" me; even if I'm in for a real relapse _some_ of
the sting will, I trust, have been drawn.

/*
Yours rather wearily,
HENRY JAMES.
*/

P.S. I _am_ having, it appears--Sunday, 2 p.m.--to tumble back into bed;
though I rose but at 10!




_To Edmund Gosse._


_Dictated._

/*
Lamb House, Rye.

October 15th, 1912.
*/

/*
My dear Gosse,
*/

Here I am at it again--for I can't not thank you for your two notes last
night and this morning received. Your wife has all my tenderest sympathy
in the matter of what the loss of her Brother cost her. Intimately will
her feet have learnt to know these ways. So it goes on till we have no
one left to lose--as I felt, with force, two summers ago, when I lost my
two last Brothers within two months and became sole survivor of all my
Father's house. I lay my hand very gently on our friend.

With your letter of last night came the Cornhill with the beautifully
done little Swinburne chapter. What a "grateful" subject, somehow, in
every way, that gifted being--putting aside even, I mean, the value of
his genius. He is grateful by one of those arbitrary values that dear
G.M., for instance, doesn't positively command, in proportion to his
intrinsic weight; and who can say quite why? Charming and vivid and
authentic, at any rate, your picture of that occasion; to say nothing of
your evocation, charged with so fine a Victorian melancholy, of
Swinburne's time at Vichy with Leighton, Mrs. Sartoris and Richard
Burton; what a felicitous and enviable image they do make together--and
what prodigious discourse must even more particularly have ensued when
S. and B. sat up late together after the others! Distinct to me the
memory of a Sunday afternoon at Flaubert's in the winter of '75-'76,
when Maupassant, still _inédit_, but always "round," regaled me with a
fantastic tale, irreproducible here, of the relations between two
Englishmen, each other, and their monkey! A picture the details of which
have faded for me, but not the lurid impression. Most deliciously
Victorian that too--I bend over it all so yearningly; and to the effect
of my hoping "ever so" that you are in conscious possession of material
for a series of just such other chapters in illustration of S., each a
separate fine flower for a vivid even if loose nosegay.

I'm much interested by your echo of Haldane's remarks, or whatever,
about G. M. Only the difficulty is, of a truth, somehow, that _ces
messieurs_; he and Morley and Maxse and Stephen, and two or three
others, Lady Ulrica included, really never knew much more where _they_
were, on all the "aesthetic" ground, as one for convenience calls it,
than the dear man himself did, or where _he_ was; so that the whole
history seems a record somehow (so far as "art and letters" are in
question) of a certain absence of point on the part of every one
concerned in it. Still, it abides with us, I think, that Meredith was an
admirable spirit even if not an _entire_ mind; he throws out, to my
sense, splendid great moral and ethical, what he himself would call
"spiritual," lights, and has again and again big strong whiffs of manly
tone and clear judgment. The fantastic and the mannered in him were as
nothing, I think, to the intimately sane and straight; just as the
artist was nothing to the good citizen and the liberalised bourgeois.
However, lead me not on! I thank you ever so kindly for the authenticity
of your word about these beastly recurrences (of my disorder.) I feel
you floated in confidence on the deep tide of Philip's experience and
wisdom. Still, I _am_ trying to keep mainly out of bed again (after 48
hours just renewedly spent in it.) But on these terms you'll wish me
back there--and I'm yours with no word more,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Edmund Gosse._

/#
     Mr. Gosse had asked for further details with regard to Maupassant's
     tale, referred to in the previous letter. The legend in question
     was connected with Etretat and the odd figure of George E. J.
     Powell, Swinburne's host there during the summer of 1868, and more
     than once afterwards.
#/


_Dictated._

/*
Lamb House, Rye.

October 17th, 1912.
*/

/*
My dear Gosse,
*/

It's very well invoking a close to this raging fever of a correspondence
when you have such arts for sending and keeping the temperature up! I
feel in the presence of your letter last night received that the little
machine thrust under one's tongue may well now register or introduce the
babble of a mind "affected"; though interestingly so, let me add, since
it is indeed a thrill to think that I _am_ perhaps the last living
depositary of Maupassant's wonderful confidence or legend. I really
believe myself the last survivor of those then surrounding Gustave
Flaubert. I shrink a good deal at the same time, I confess, under the
burden of an honour "unto which I was not born"; or, more exactly,
hadn't been properly brought up or pre-admonished and pre-inspired to. I
pull myself together, I invoke fond memory, as you urge upon me, and I
feel the huge responsibility of my office and privilege; but at the same
time I must remind you of certain inevitable weaknesses in my position,
certain essential infirmities of my relation to the precious fact
(meaning by the precious fact Maupassant's having, in that night of time
and that general failure of inspiring prescience, so remarkably regaled
me.) You will see in a moment everything that was wanting to make me the
conscious recipient of a priceless treasure. You will see in fact how
little I could have _any_ of the right mental preparation. I didn't in
the least know that M. himself was going to be so remarkable; I didn't
in the least know that I was going to be; I didn't in the least know
(and this was above all most frivolous of me) that _you_ were going to
be; I didn't even know that the monkey was going to be, or even realise
the peculiar degree and _nuance_ of the preserved lustre awaiting ces
messieurs, the three taken together. Guy's story (he was only known as
"Guy" then) dropped into my mind but as an unrelated thing, or rather as
one related, and indeed with much intensity, to the peculiarly "rum,"
weird, macabre and unimaginable light in which the interesting, or in
other words the delirious, in English conduct and in English character,
are--or were especially then--viewed in French circles sufficiently
self-respecting to have views on the general matter at all, or in other
words among the truly refined and enquiring. "Here they are at it!" I
remember that as my main inward comment on Maupassant's vivid little
history; which was thus thereby somehow more vivid to me about _him_,
than about either our friends or the Monkey; as to whom, as I say, I
didn't in the least foresee this present hour of arraignment!

At the same time I think I'm quite prepared to say, in fact absolutely,
that of the two versions of the tale, the two quite distinct ones, to
which you attribute a mystic and separate currency over there,
Maupassant's story to me was essentially Version No. I. It wasn't at all
the minor, the comparatively banal anecdote. Really what has remained
with me is but the note of two elements--that of the Monkey's jealousy,
and that of the Monkey's death; how brought about the latter I can't at
all at this time of day be sure, though I am haunted as with the vague
impression that the poor beast figured as having somehow destroyed
_himself_, committed suicide through the separate injuria formae. The
third person in the fantastic complication was either a young man
employed as servant (within doors) or one employed as boatman, and in
either case I think English; and some thin ghost of an impression abides
with me that the "jealousy" was more on the Monkey's part toward him
than on his toward the Monkey; with which the circumstance that the
Death I seem most (yet so dimly) to disembroil is simply and solely, or
at least predominantly, that of the resentful and impassioned beast: who
hovers about me as having seen the other fellow, the jeune anglais or
whoever, installed on the scene after he was more or less lord of it,
and so invade his province. You see how light and thin and confused are
my data! _How_ I wish I had known or guessed enough in advance to be
able to oblige you better now: not a stone then would I have left
unturned, not an i would I have allowed to remain undotted; no analysis
or exhibition of the national character (of _either_ of the national
characters) so involved would I have failed to catch in the act. Yet I
do so far serve you, it strikes me, as to be clear about _this_--that,
whatever turn the dénouement took, whichever life was most luridly
sacrificed (of those of the two humble dependants), the drama had
essentially been one of the affections, the passions, the last
_cocasserie_, with each member of the quartette involved! Disentangle it
as you can--I think Browning alone could really do so! Does this at any
rate--the best I can do for you--throw any sufficient light? I recognise
the importance, the historic bearing and value, of the most perfectly
worked-out view of it. _Such_ a pity, with this, that as I recover the
fleeting moments from across the long years it is my then active
figuration of the so tremendously _averti_ young Guy's intellectual,
critical, vital, experience of the subject-matter that hovers before me,
rather than my comparatively detached curiosity as to the greater or
less originality of ces messieurs!--even though, with this, highly
original they would appear to have been. I seem moreover to mix up the
occasion a little (I mean the occasion of that confidence) with another,
still more dim, on which the so communicative Guy put it to me, àpropos
of I scarce remember what, that though he had remained quite outside of
the complexity I have been glancing at, some jeune anglais, in some
other connection, had sought to draw him into some scarcely less
fantastic or abnormal one, to the necessary determination on his part of
some prompt and energetic action to the contrary: the details of which
now escape me--it's all such a golden blur of old-time Flaubertism and
Goncourtism! How many more strange flowers one _might_ have gathered up
and preserved! There was something from Goncourt one afternoon about
certain Swans (they seem to run so to the stranger walks of the animal
kingdom!) who figured in the background of some prodigious British
existence, and of whom I seem to recollect there is some faint recall in
"La Faustin" (not, by the way, "_Le_ Faustin," as I think the printer
has betrayed you into calling it in your recent Cornhill paper.) But the
golden blur swallows up everything, everything but the slow-crawling,
the too lagging, loitering amendment in my tiresome condition,
out-distanced by the impatient and attached spirit of yours all
faithfully,

/*
HENRY JAMES,
*/




_To H. G. Wells._


_Dictated._

/*
Lamb House, Rye.
October 18th, 1912.
*/

/*
My dear Wells,
*/

I have been sadly silent since having to wire you (nearly three weeks
ago) my poor plea of inability to embrace your so graceful offer of an
occasion for my at last meeting, in accordance with my liveliest desire,
the eminent Arnold Bennett; sadly in fact is a mild word for it, for I
have cursed and raged, I have almost irrecoverably suffered--with all of
which the end is not yet. I had just been taken, when I answered your
charming appeal, with a violent and vicious attack of "Shingles"--under
which I have lain prostrate till this hour. I don't shake it off--and
perhaps you know how fell a thing it may be. I am precariously "up" and
can do a little to beguile the black inconvenience of loss of time at a
most awkward season by dealing after this graceless fashion with such
arrears of smashed correspondence as I may so presume to patch up; but I
mayn't yet plan for the repair of other losses--I see no hope of my
leaving home for many days, and haven't yet been further out of this
house than to creep feebly about my garden, where a blest season has
most fortunately reigned. A couple of months hence I go up to town to
stay (I have taken a lease of a small unfurnished flat in Chelsea, on
the river;) and there for the ensuing five or six months I shall aim at
inducing you to bring the kind Bennett, whom I meanwhile cordially and
ruefully greet, to partake with me of some modest hospitality.

Meanwhile if I've been deprived of you on one plane I've been living
with you very hard on another; you may not have forgotten that you
kindly sent me "Marriage" (as you always so kindly render me that valued
service;) which I've been able to give myself to at my less afflicted
and ravaged hours. I have read you, as I always read you, and as I read
no one else, with a complete abdication of all those "principles of
criticism," canons of form, preconceptions of felicity, references to
the idea of method or the sacred laws of composition, which I roam,
which I totter, through the pages of others attended in some dim degree
by the fond yet feeble theory of, but which I shake off, as I advance
under your spell, with the most cynical inconsistency. For under your
spell I do advance--save when I pull myself up stock still in order not
to break it with so much as the breath of appreciation; I live with you
and in you and (almost cannibal-like) _on_ you, on you H. G. W., to the
sacrifice of your Marjories and your Traffords, and whoever may be of
their company; not your treatment of them, at all, but, much more, their
befooling of you (pass me the merely scientific expression--I mean your
fine high action in view of the red herring of lively interest they
trail for you at their heels) becoming thus of the essence of the
spectacle for me, and nothing in it all "happening" so much as these
attestations of your character and behaviour, these reactions of yours
as you more or less follow them, affect me as vividly happening. I see
you "behave," all along, much more than I see them even when they
behave (as I'm not sure they behave _most_ in "Marriage") with whatever
charged intensity or accomplished effect; so that the ground of the
drama is somehow most of all the adventure for _you_--not to say of
you--the moral, temperamental, personal, expressional, of your setting
it forth; an adventure in fine more appreciable to me than any of those
you are by way of letting _them_ in for. I don't say that those you let
them in for don't interest me too, and don't "come off" and people the
scene and lead on the attention, about as much as I can do with; but
only, and always, that you beat them on their own ground and that your
"story," through the five hundred pages, says more to me than theirs.
You'll find this perhaps a queer rigmarole of a statement, but I ask you
to allow for it just now as the mumble, at best, of an invalid; and wait
a little till I can put more of my hand on my sense. Mind you that the
restriction I may seem to you to lay on my view of your work still
leaves that work more convulsed with life and more brimming with blood
than any it is given me nowadays to meet. The point I have wanted to
make is that I find myself absolutely unable, and still more unwilling,
to approach you, or to take leave of you, in any projected light of
criticism, in any judging or concluding, any comparing, in fact in any
aesthetic or "literary" relation at all; and this in spite of the fact
that the light of criticism is almost that in which I most fondly bask
and that the amusement I consequently renounce is one of the dearest of
all to me. I simply decline--that's the way the thing works--to pass you
again through my cerebral oven for critical consumption: I consume you
crude and whole and to the last morsel, cannibalistically, quite, as I
say; licking the platter clean of the last possibility of a savour and
remaining thus yours abjectly,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Mrs. Humphry Ward._


_Dictated._

/*
Lamb House, Rye.

October 22nd, 1912.
*/

/*
Dear Mary Ward,
*/

Having to acknowledge in this cold-blooded form so gracious a favour as
your kind letter just received is so sorry a business as to tell at once
a sad tale of the stricken state. I have been laid up these three weeks
with an atrocious visitation of "Shingles," as the odious ailment is so
vulgarly and inadequately called--the medical _herpes zonalis_ meeting
much better the malign intensity of the case--and the end is not yet. I
am still most sore and sorry and can but work off in this fashion a
fraction of my correspondence. C'est assez vous dire that I can make no
plan for any social adventure within any computable time. Forgive my
taking this occasion to add further and with that final frankness that
winds up "periods of life" and earthly stages, as it were, that I feel
the chapter of social adventure now forever closed, and that I must go
on for the rest of my days, such as that rest may be, only _tout
doucement_, as utterly doucement as can possibly be managed. I am aged,
infirm, hideously unsociable and utterly detached from any personal
participation in the political game, to which I am naturally and from
all circumstances so alien here, and which forms the constant carnival
of all you splendid young people. Don't take this unamiable statement,
please, for a profession of relaxed attachment to any bright individual,
or least of all to any valued old friends; but just pardon my dropping
it, as I pass, in the interest of the great pusillanimity that I find it
important positively to cultivate--even at the risk of affecting you as
solemn and pompous and ridiculous. I will admit to you (should you be
so gently patient as to be moved in the least to contend with me) that
this prolonged visitation of pain doesn't suggest to one views of future
ease of any kind. I have none the less a view of coming up to town, for
the rest of the winter, as soon as possible after Christmas; and I
reserve the social adventure of tea in Grosvenor Place--effected with
impunity--as the highest crown of my confidence. I shall trust you then
to observe how exactly those charming conditions may seem suited to my
powers. I'm delighted to know meanwhile that you have finished a gallant
piece of work, which is more than I can say of myself after a whole
summer of stiff frustration; for my current complaint is but the
overflow of the bucket. Just see how your great goodnature has exposed
you to that spatterment! But I pull up--this is too lame a gait; and am
yours all not less faithfully than feebly,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Mrs. Humphry Ward._


_Dictated._

/*
Lamb House, Rye.

October 24th, 1912.
*/

/*
My dear Mary Ward,
*/

I feel I _must_ really thank you afresh, even by the freedom of this
impersonal mechanism, for your renewed expression of kindness--very
soothing and sustaining to me in my still rather dreary case. I am doing
my utmost to get better, but the ailment has apparently endless secrets
of its own for preventing that; an infernal player with still another
and another vicious card up his sleeve. This is precisely why your
generous accents touch me--making me verily yearn as I think of the balm
I should indeed find in talking with you of the latest products of
those producers (few though they be) who lend themselves in a degree to
remark. I have but within a day or two permitted myself a modicum of
remark to H.G. Wells--who had sent me "Marriage"; but I should really
rather have addressed the quantity to you, on whom it's not so important
I should make my impression. I mean I should be in your case
comparatively irrelevant--whereas in his I feel myself relevant only to
be by the same stroke, as it were, but vain and ineffectual. Strange to
me--in his affair--the coexistence of so much talent with so little art,
so much life with (so to speak) so little living! But of him there is
much to say, for I really think him more interesting by his faults than
he will probably ever manage to be in any other way; and he is a most
vivid and violent object-lesson. But it's as if I were pretending to
talk--which, for this beastly frustration, I am not. I envy you the
quite ideal and transcendent jollity (as if Marie Corelli had herself
evoked the image for us) of having polished off a brilliant _coup_ and
being on your way to celebrate the case in Paris. It's for me to-day as
if people only did these things in Marie--and in Mary! Do while you are
there re-enter, if convenient to you, into relation with Mrs. Wharton;
if she be back, that is, from the last of her dazzling, her incessant,
braveries of far excursionism. You may in that case be able to appease a
little my always lively appetite for news of her. Don't, I beseech you,
"acknowledge" in any manner this, with all you have else to do; not even
to hurl back upon me (in refutation, reprobation or whatever) the charge
I still persist in of your liking "politics" because of your all having,
as splendid young people, the perpetual good time of being so intimately
_in_ them. They never cease to remind me personally, here (close
corporation or intimate social club as they practically affect the aged
and infirm, the lone and detached, the abjectly literary and unenrolled
alien as being,) that one must sacrifice all sorts of blest freedoms and
immunities, treasures of detachment and perception that make up for the
"outsider" state, on any occasion of practical approach to circling
round the camp; for penetration into which I haven't a single one of
your pass-words--yours, I again mean, of the splendid young lot. But
don't pity me, all the same, for this picture of my dim exclusion; it is
so compatible with more _other_ initiations than I know, on the whole,
almost what to do with. I hear the pass-words given--for it does happen
that they sometimes reach my ear; and then, so far from representing for
me the "salt of life," as you handsomely put it, they seem to form for
me the very measure of intellectual insipidity. All of which, however,
is so much more than I meant to be led on to growl back at your perfect
benevolence. Still, still, still--well, _still_ I am harmoniously yours,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




TO GAILLARD T. LAPSLEY.


_Dictated._

/*
Lamb House, Rye.

October 24th, 1912.

My dear grand Gaillard,
*/

I seem to do nothing just now but hurl back gruff refusals at gracious
advances--and all in connection with the noble shades and the social
scenes you particularly haunt. I wrote Howard S. last night that I
couldn't, for weary dreary reasons, come to meet you at Qu'acre; and now
I have just polished off (by this mechanical means, to which, for the
time, I'm squalidly restricted) the illustrious Master of Magdalene, who
artfully and insidiously backed by your scarce less shining self, has
invited me to exhibit my battered old person and blighted old wit on
some luridly near day in those parts. I have had to refuse him, though
using for the purpose the most grovelling language; and I have now to
thank you, with the same morbid iridescence of form and the same
invincible piggishness of spirit, for your share in the large appeal.
Things are complicated with me to the last degree, please believe, at
present; and the highest literary flights I am capable of are these vain
_gestes_ from the dizzy edge of the couch of pain. I have been this
whole month sharply ill--under an odious visitation of "Shingles"; and
am not yet free or healed or able; not at all on my feet or at my ease.
It has been a most dismal summer for me, for, after a most horrid and
undermined July and August, I had begun in September to face about to
work and hope, when this new plague of Egypt suddenly broke--to make
confusion worse confounded. I am up to my neck in arrears, disabilities,
and I should add despairs--were my resolution not to be beaten, however
battered, not so adequate, apparently, to my constitutional presumption.
Meanwhile, oh yes, I am of course as bruised and bored, as deprived and
isolated, and even as indignant, as you like. But that I still can be
indignant seems to kind of promise; perhaps it's a symptom of dawning
salvation. The great thing, at any rate, is for you to understand that I
look forward to being fit within no _calculable_ time either to prance
in public or prattle in private, and that I grieve to have nothing
better to tell you. Very charming and kind to me your own news from
là-bas. I won't attempt to do justice now to "all that side." I sent
Howard last night some express message to you--which kindly see that he
delivers. We shall manage something, all the same, yet, and I am all
faithfully yours,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To John Bailey._

/#
     The following refers to the offer, transmitted by Mr. Bailey, of
     the chairmanship of the English Association.
#/


_Dictated._

/*
Lamb House, Rye.

November 11th, 1912.
*/

/*
My dear John,
*/

Forgive (and while you are about it please commiserate) my having to
take this roundabout way of acknowledging your brave letter. I am
stricken and helpless still--I can't sit up like a gentleman and drive
the difficult pen. I am having an absolutely horrid and endless
visitation--being now in the seventh week of the ordeal I had the other
day to mention to you. It's a weary, dreary business, perpetual
atrocious suffering, and you must pardon my replying to you as I can and
not at all as I would. And I speak here, I have, alas, to say, not of my
form of utterance only--for my matter (given that of your own charming
appeal) would have in whatever conditions to be absolutely the same. Let
me, for some poor comfort's sake, make the immediate rude jump to the
one possible truth of my case: it is out of my power to meet your
invitation with the least decency or grace. When one declines a
beautiful honour, when one simply sits impenetrable to a generous and
eloquent appeal, one had best have the horrid act over as soon as
possible and not appear to beat about the bush and keep up the fond
suspense. For me, frankly, my dear John, there is simply no question of
these things: I am a mere stony, ugly monster of _Dis_sociation and
Detachment. I have never in all my life gone in for these other things,
but have dodged and shirked and successfully evaded them--to the best
of my power at least, and so far as they have in fact assaulted me: all
my instincts and the very essence of any poor thing that I might, or
even still may, trump up for the occasion as my "genius" have been
against them, and are more against them at this day than ever, though
two or three of them (meaning by "them" the collective and congregated
bodies, the splendid organisations, aforesaid) have successfully got
their teeth, in spite of all I could do, into my bewildered and badgered
antiquity. And this last, you see, is just one of the _reasons_--! for
my not collapsing further, not exhibiting the last demoralisation, under
the elegant pressure of which your charming plea is so all but dazzling
a specimen. I can't go into it all much in this sorry condition (a bad
and dismal one still, for my ailment is not only, at the end of so many
weeks, as "tedious" as you suppose, but quite fiendishly painful into
the bargain)--but the rough sense of it is that I believe only in
absolutely independent, individual and lonely virtue, and in the
serenely unsociable (or if need be at a pinch sulky and sullen) practice
of the same; the observation of a lifetime having convinced me that no
fruit ripens but under that temporarily graceless rigour, and that the
associational process for bringing it on is but a bright and hollow
artifice, all vain and delusive. (I speak here of the Arts--or of my own
poor attempt at one or two of them; the other matters must speak for
themselves.) Let me even while I am about it heap up the measure of my
grossness: the mere dim vision of presiding or what is called, I
believe, taking the chair, at a speechifying public dinner, fills me,
and has filled me all my life, with such aversion and horror that I have
in the most odious manner consistently refused for years to be present
on such occasions even as a guest pre-assured of protection and
effacement, and have not departed from my grim consistency even when
cherished and excellent friends were being "offered" the banquet. I have
at such times let them know in advance that I was utterly not to be
counted on, and have indeed quite gloried in my shame; sitting at home
the while and gloating over the fact that I wasn't present. In fine the
revolution that my pretending to lend myself to your noble combination
would propose to make in my life is unthinkable save as a convulsion
that would simply end it. This then must serve as my answer to your
kindest of letters--until at some easier hour I am able to make you a
less brutal one. I know you would, or even will wrestle with me, or at
least feel as if you would like to; and I won't deny that to converse
with you on any topic under the sun, and even in a connection in which I
may appear at my worst, can never be anything but a delight to me. The
idea of such a delight so solicits me, in fact, as I write, that if I
were only somewhat less acutely laid up, and free to spend less of my
time in bed and in anguish, I would say at once: Do come down to lunch
and dine and sleep, so that I may have the pleasure of you in spite of
my nasty attitude. As it is, please let me put it thus: that as soon as
I get sufficiently better (if I ever do at this rate) to rise to the
level of even so modest an hospitality as I am at best reduced to, I
_will_ appeal to you to come and partake of it, in your magnanimity, to
that extent: not to show you that I am not utterly adamant, but that for
private association, for the banquet of _two_ and the fellowship of
_that_ fine scale, I have the best will in the world. We shall talk so
much (and, I am convinced in spite of everything, so happily) that I
won't say more now--except that I venture all the same to commend myself
brazenly to Mrs. John, and that I am yours all faithfully,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Dr. J. William White._


_Dictated._

/*
Lamb House, Rye.

November 14th, 1912.
*/

/*
My dear William,
*/

I am reduced for the present to this graceless machinery, but I would
rather use it "on" you than let your vivid letter pass, under stress of
my state, and so establish a sad precedent: since you know I _never_ let
your letters pass. I have been down these seven weeks with an atrocious
and apparently absolutely endless attack of "Shingles"--herpes zonalis,
you see I know!--of the abominable nature of which, at their worst, you
will be aware from your professional experience, even if you are not, as
I devoutly hope, by your personal. I have been having a simple hell
(saving Letitia's presence) of a time; for at its worst (and a
mysterious providence has held me worthy only of _that_) the pain and
the perpetual distress are to the last degree excruciating and wearing.
The end, moreover, is not yet: I go on and on--and feel as if I might
for the rest of my life--or _would_ honestly so feel were it not that I
have some hope of light or relief from an eminent specialist ... who has
most kindly promised to come down from London and see me three days
hence. My good "local practitioner" has quite thrown up the sponge--he
can do nothing for me further and has welcomed a consultation with an
alacrity that speaks volumes for his now at last quite voided state.

This is a dismal tale to regale you with--accustomed as even you are to
dismal tales from me; but let it stand for attenuation of my [failure]
to enter, with any lightness of step, upon the vast avenue of
complacency over which you invite me to advance to some fonder
contemplation of Mr. Roosevelt. I must simply state to you, my dear
William, that I can't so much as _think_ of Mr. Roosevelt for two
consecutive moments: he has become to me, these last months, the mere
monstrous embodiment of unprecedented resounding Noise; the steps he
lately took toward that effect--of presenting himself as the noisiest
figure, or agency of any kind, in the long, dire annals of the human
race--having with me at least so consummately succeeded. I can but see
him and hear him and feel him as raging sound and fury; and if ever a
man was in a phase of his weary development, or stage of his persistent
decline (as you will call it) or crisis of his afflicted nerves (which
you will say I deserve), _not_ to wish to roar with that Babel, or to be
roared at _by_ it, that worm-like creature is your irreconcileable
friend. Let me say that I haven't yet read your Eulogy of the monster,
as enclosed by you in the newspaper columns accompanying your
letter--this being a bad, weak, oppressed and harassed moment for my
doing so. You see the savagery of last summer, thundering upon our
tympanums (pardon me, tympana) from over the sea, has left such scars,
such a jangle of the auditive nerve (am I technically right?) as to make
the least menace of another yell a thing of horror. I don't mean, dear
William, that I suppose _you_ yell--my auditive nerve cherishes in spite
of everything the memory of your vocal sweetness; but your bristling
protégé has but to peep at me from over your shoulder to make me clap my
hands to my ears and bury my head in the deepest hollow of that pile of
pillows amid which I am now passing so much of my life. However, I must
now fall back upon them--and I rejoice meanwhile in those lines of your
good letter in which you give so handsome an account of your own
soundness and (physical) saneness. I take this, fondly, too, for the
picture of Letitia's "form"--knowing as I do with what inveterate
devotion she ever forms herself _upon_ you. I embrace you both, my dear
William--so far as you consent to my abasing you (and abasing Letitia,
which is graver) to the pillows aforesaid, and am ever affectionately
yours and hers,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Edmund Gosse._

/#
     Mr. Gosse's volume was his _Portraits and Sketches_, just
     published.
#/


_Dictated._

/*
Lamb House, Rye.

November 19th, 1912.
*/

/*
My dear Gosse,
*/

I received longer ago than I quite like to give you chapter and verse
for your so-vividly interesting volume of literary Portraits; but you
will have (or at least I earnestly beg you to have) no reproach for my
long failure of acknowledgment when I tell you that my sorry state,
under this dire physical visitation, has unintermittently continued, and
that the end, or any kind of real break in a continuity of quite
damnable pain, has still to be taken very much on trust. I am now in my
8th week of the horrible experience, which I have had to endure with
remarkably little medical mitigation--really with none worth speaking
of. Stricken and helpless, therefore, I can do but little, to this
communicative tune, on any one day; which has been also the more the
case as my admirable Secretary was lately forced to be a whole fortnight
absent--when I remained indeed without resource. I avail myself for this
snatch of one of the first possible days, or rather hours, since her
return. But I read your book, with lively "reactions," within the first
week of its arrival, and if I had then only had you more within range
should have given you abundantly the benefit of my impressions, making
you more genial observations than I shall perhaps now be able wholly to
recover. I recover perfectly the great one at any rate--it is that each
of the studies has extraordinary individual life, and that of Swinburne
in particular, of course, more than any image that will ever be
projected of him. This is a most interesting and charming paper, with
never a drop or a slackness from beginning to end. I can't help wishing
you had proceeded a little further _critically_--that is, I mean, in the
matter of appreciation of his essential stuff and substance, the
proportions of his mixture, etc.; as I should have been tempted to say
to you, for instance, "Go into that a bit now!" when you speak of the
early setting-in of his arrest of development etc. But this may very
well have been out of your frame--it might indeed have taken you far;
and the space remains wonderfully filled-in, the figure all-convincing.
Beautiful too the Bailey, the Horne and the Creighton--this last very
rich and fine and touching. I envy you your having known so well so
genial a creature as Creighton, with such largeness of endowment. You
have done him very handsomely and tenderly; and poor little Shorthouse
not to the last point of tenderness perhaps, but no doubt as handsomely,
none the less, as was conceivably possible. I won't deny to you that it
was to your Andrew Lang I turned most immediately and with most
suspense--and with most of an effect of drawing a long breath when it
was over. It is very prettily and artfully brought off--but you would of
course have invited me to feel with you how little you felt you were
doing it as we should, so to speak, have "really liked." Of course there
were the difficulties, and of course you had to defer in a manner to
some of them; but your paper is of value just in proportion as you more
or less overrode them. His recent extinction, the facts of long
acquaintance and camaraderie, let alone the wonder of several of his
gifts and the mass of his achievement, couldn't, and still can't, in his
case, not he complicating, clogging and qualifying circumstances; but
what a pity, with them all, that a figure so lending itself to a certain
amount of interesting _real_ truthtelling, should, honestly speaking,
enjoy such impunity, as regards some of its idiosyncrasies, should get
off so scot-free ("Scot"-free is exactly the word!) on all the ground of
its greatest hollowness, so much of its most "successful" puerility and
perversity. Where I can't but feel that he _should_ be brought to
justice is in the matter of his whole "give-away" of the value of the
wonderful chances he so continually enjoyed (enjoyed thanks to certain
of his very gifts, I admit!)--give-away, I mean, by his _cultivation_,
absolutely, of the puerile imagination and the fourth-rate opinion, the
coming round to that of the old apple-woman at the corner as after all
the good and the right as to any of the mysteries of mind or of art. His
mixture of endowments and vacant holes, and "the making of the part" of
each, would by themselves be matter for a really edifying critical
study--for which, however, I quite recognise that the day and the
occasion have already hurried heedlessly away. And I perhaps throw a
disproportionate weight on the whole question--merely by reason of a
late accident or two; such as my having recently read his (in two or
three respects so able) Joan of Arc, or Maid of France, and turned over
his just-published (I think posthumous) compendium of "English
Literature," which lies on my table downstairs. The extraordinary
inexpensiveness and childishness and impertinence of this latter gave to
my sense the measure of a whole side of Lang, and yet which was one of
the sides of his greatest flourishing. His extraordinary _voulu_ Scotch
provincialism crowns it and rounds it off really making one at moments
ask with what kind of an innermost intelligence such inanities and
follies were compatible. The Joan of Arc is another matter, of course;
but even there, with all the accomplishment, all the possession of
detail, the sense of reality, the vision of the truths and processes of
life, the light of experience and the finer sense of history, seem to me
so wanting, that in spite of the thing's being written so intensely _at_
Anatole France, and in spite of some of A. F.'s own (and so different!)
perversities, one "kind of" feels and believes Andrew again and again
bristlingly yet _bêtement_ wrong, and Anatole sinuously, yet oh so
wisely, right!

However, all this has taken me absurdly far, and you'll wonder why I
should have broken away at such a tangent. You had given me the
opportunity, but it's over and I shall never speak again! I wish _you_
would, all the same--since it may still somehow come your way. Your
paper as it stands is a gage of possibilities. But good-bye--I can't in
this condition keep anything up; scarce even my confidence that Time, to
which I have been clinging, is going, after all to help. I had from
Saturday to Sunday afternoon last, it is true, the admirably kind and
beneficent visit of a London friend who happens to be at the same time
the great and all-knowing authority and expert on Herpes; he was so
angelic as to come down and see me, for 24 hours, thoroughly overhaul me
and leave me with the best assurance and with, what is more to the
point, a remedy very probably more effective than any yet vouchsafed to
me.... When I do at last emerge I shall escape from these confines and
come up to town for the rest of the winter. But I shall have to feel
differently first, and it may not be for some time yet. It in fact
can't _possibly_ be soon. You shall have then, at any rate, more
news--"which," à la Mrs. Gamp, I hope your own has a better show to
make.

/*
Yours all, and all faithfully,
HENRY JAMES.
*/

P.S. I hope my last report on the little Etretat legend--it seems (not
the legend but the report) of so long ago!--gave you something of the
light you desired. And how I should have liked to hear about the Colvin
dinner and its rich chiaroscuro. He has sent me his printed--charming, I
think--speech: "the best thing he has done."




_To Mrs. Bigelow._


_Dictated._

/*
Lamb House, Rye.

November 21st, 1912.
*/

/*
My dear Edith,
*/

It is interesting to hear from you on any ground--even when I am in the
stricken state that this form of reply will suggest to you.... For a
couple of hours in the morning I can work off letters in this way--this
way only; but let the rest be silence, till I scramble somehow or other,
if I ever do, out of my hole. Pray for me hard meanwhile--you and Baby,
and even the ingenuous Young Man; pray for me with every form and rite
of sacrifice and burnt-offering.

As for the matter of your little request, it is of course easy, too
easy, to comply with: why shouldn't you, for instance, just nip off my
simple signature at the end of this and hand it to the artless
suppliant? I call him by these bad names in spite of your gentle picture
of him, for the simple reason that the time long ago, half a century
ago, passed away when a request for one's autograph could affect one as
anything but the cheapest and vaguest and emptiest "tribute" the
futility of our common nature is capable of. I should like your young
friend so much better, and believe so much more in his sentiments, if it
exactly _hadn't_ occurred to him to put forth the _banal_ claim. My
heart has been from far back, as I say, absolutely hard against it; and
the rate at which it is (saving your presence) postally vomited forth is
one of the least graceful features, one of the vulgarest and dustiest
and poorest, of the great and glorious country beyond the sea. These
ruthless words of mine will sufficiently explain to you why I indulge in
no further flourish for our common admirer (for I'm _sure_ you share him
with me!) than my few and bare terminal penstrokes here shall represent!
Put him off with _them_--and even, if you like, read him my relentless
words. Then if he winces, or weeps, or does anything nice and penitent
and, above all, _intelligent_, press him to your bosom, pat him on the
back (which you would so be in a position to do) and tell him to sin no
more.

What is much more interesting are your vivid little words about yourself
and the child. I shall put them by, with your address upon them, till,
emerging from my long tunnel, as God grant I may, I come up to town to
put in the rest of the winter. I have taken the lease, a longish one, of
a little flat in Chelsea, Cheyne Walk, which must now give me again a
better place of London hibernation than I have for a long time had. It
had become necessary, for life-saving; and as soon as I shall have
turned round in it you must come and have tea with me and bring Baby and
even the Ingenuous One, if my wild words haven't or don't turn his
tender passion to loathing. I shall really like much to see him--and
even send him my love and blessing. Even if I have produced in him a
vindictive reaction I will engage to take him in hand and so gently
argue with him (on the horrid autograph habit) that he will perhaps
renew his generous vows! I shall have nothing to show _you_, later on,
so charming as the rhythmic Butcher's or the musical Pub; only a dull
inhuman view of the River--which, however, adds almost as much to my
rent as I gather that your advantages add to yours! Yours all
faithfully,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/

P.S. I see the infatuated Youth is (on reading your note fondly over)
not at your side (but "on the other side") and therefore not amenable to
your Bosom (worse luck for him)--so I scrawl him my sign independently
of this. But the moral holds!




_To Robert C. Witt._

/#
     It will be remembered that the story of _The Outcry_ turns on the
     fortunes of a picture attributed to "Il Mantovano."
#/


_Dictated._

/*
Lamb House, Rye.

November 27th, 1912.
*/

/*
Dear Sir,
*/

I am almost shocked to learn, through your appreciative note, that in
imaginatively projecting, for use in "The Outcry," such a painter as the
Mantovano, I unhappily coincided with an existing name, an artistic
identity, a real one, with visible examples, in the annals of the art. I
had never heard (in I am afraid my disgraceful ignorance) of the painter
the two specimens of whom in the National Gallery you cite; and fondly
flattered myself that I had simply excogitated, for its part in my
drama, a name at once plausible, that is of good Italian type, and
effective, as it were, for dramatic bandying-about. It was important,
you see, that with the great claim that the story makes for my artist I
should have a strictly supposititious one--with no awkward existing data
to cast a possibly invidious or measurable light. So _my_ Mantovano was
a creature of mere (convincing) fancy--and this revelation of my not
having been as inventive as I supposed rather puts me out! But I owe it
to you none the less that I shall be able--after I have recovered from
this humiliation--to go and have a look at our N.G. interloper. I thank
you for this and am faithfully yours,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Mrs. Wharton._

/#
     Mrs. Wharton had sent him her recently published novel, _The Reef_.
#/


_Dictated._

/*
Lamb House, Rye.

December 4th, 1912.
*/

/*
My dear E. W.
*/

Your beautiful book has been my portion these several days, but as other
matters, of a less ingratiating sort, have shared the fair harbourage, I
fear I have left it a trifle bumped and _bousculé_ in that at the best
somewhat agitated basin. There it will gracefully ride the waves,
however, long after every other temporarily floating object shall have
sunk, as so much comparative "rot," beneath them. This is a rude figure
for my sense of the entire interest and charm, the supreme validity and
distinction, of The Reef. I am even yet, alas, in anything but a good
way--so abominably does my ailment drag itself out; but it has been a
real lift to read you and taste and ponder you; the experience has
literally worked, at its hours, in a medicating sense that neither my
local nor my London Doctor (present here in his greatness for a night
and a day) shall have come within miles and miles of. Let me mention at
once, and have done with it, that the advent and the effect of the
intenser London light can only be described as an anticlimax, in fact as
a tragic farce, of the first water; in short one of those _mauvais_
tours, as far as results are concerned, that make one wonder how a
Patient ever survives _any_ relation with a Doctor. My Visitor was
charming, intelligent, kind, all visibly a great master of the question;
but he prescribed me a remedy, to begin its action directly he had left,
that simply and at a short notice sent me down into hell, where I lay
sizzling (never such a sizzle before) for three days, and has since
followed it up with another under the dire effect of which I languish
even as I now write.... So much to express both what I owe you or _have_
owed you at moments that at all lent themselves--in the way of pervading
balm, and to explain at the same time how scantly I am able for the hour
to make my right acknowledgment.

There are fifty things I should like to say to you about the Book, and I
shall have said most of them in the long run; but there are some that
eagerly rise to my lips even now and for which I want the benefit of my
"first flush" of appreciation. The whole of the finest part is, I think,
quite the finest thing you have done; both _more_ done than even the
best of your other doing, and more worth it through intrinsic value,
interest and beauty.

_December 9th._ I had to break off the other day, my dear Edith, through
simple extremity of woe; and the woe has continued unbroken ever
since--I have been in bed and in too great suffering, too unrelieved and
too continual, for me to attempt any decent form of expression. I have
just got up, for one of the first times, even now, and I sit in command
of this poor little situation, ostensibly, instead of simply being
bossed by it, though I don't at all know what it will bring. To attempt
in this state to rise to any worthy reference to The Reef seems to me a
vain thing; yet there remains with me so strongly the impression of its
quality and of the unspeakably _fouillée_ nature of the situation
between the two principals (more gone into and with more undeviating
truth than anything you have done) that I can't but babble of it a
little to you even with these weak lips. It all shows, partly, what
strength of subject is, and how it carries and inspires, inasmuch as I
think your subject in its essence [is] very fine and takes in no end of
beautiful things to do. Each of these two figures is admirable for truth
and _justesse_; the woman an exquisite thing, and with her
characteristic finest, scarce differentiated notes (that is some of
them) sounded with a wonder of delicacy. I'm not sure her oscillations
are not beyond our notation; yet they are so held in your hand, so felt
and known and shown, and everything seems so to come of itself. I suffer
or worry a little from the fact that in the Prologue, as it were, we are
admitted so much into the consciousness of the man, and that after the
introduction of Anna (Anna so perfectly named) we see him almost only as
she sees him--which gives our attention a different sort of work to do;
yet this is really, I think, but a triumph of your method, for he
remains of an absolute consistent verity, showing himself in that way
better perhaps than in any other, and without a false note imputable,
not a shadow of one, to his manner of so projecting himself. The beauty
of it is that it is, for all it is worth, a Drama, and almost, as it
seems to me, of the psychologic Racinian unity, intensity and gracility.
Anna is really of Racine and one presently begins to feel her throughout
as an Eriphyle or a Bérénice: which, by the way, helps to account a
little for something _qui me chiffonne_ throughout: which is why the
whole thing, unrelated and unreferred save in the most superficial way
to its _milieu_ and background, and to any determining or qualifying
_entourage_, takes place _comme cela_, and in a specified, localised
way, in France--these non-French people "electing," as it were, to have
their story out there. This particularly makes all sorts of unanswered
questions come up about Owen; and the notorious wickedness of Paris
isn't at all required to bring about the conditions of the Prologue. Oh,
if you knew how plentifully we could supply them in London and, I should
suppose, in New York or in Boston. But the point was, as I see it, that
you couldn't really give us the sense of a Boston Eriphyle or Boston
Givré, and that an exquisite instinct, "back of" your Racinian
inspiration and settling the whole thing for you, whether consciously or
not, absolutely prescribed a vague and elegant French colonnade or
gallery, with a French river dimly gleaming through, as the harmonious
_fond_ you required. In the key of this, with all your reality, you have
yet kept the whole thing: and, to deepen the harmony and accentuate the
literary pitch, have never surpassed yourself for certain exquisite
_moments_, certain images, analogies, metaphors, certain silver
correspondences in your _façon de dire_; examples of which I could pluck
out and numerically almost confound you with, were I not stammering this
in so handicapped a way. There used to be little notes in you that were
like fine benevolent finger-marks of the good George Eliot--the echo of
much reading of that excellent woman, here and there, that is, sounding
through. But now you are like a lost and recovered "ancient" whom _she_
might have got a reading of (especially were he a Greek) and of whom in
_her_ texture some weaker reflection were to show. For, dearest Edith,
you are stronger and firmer and finer than all of them put together; you
go further and you say _mieux_, and your only drawback is not having the
homeliness and the inevitability and the happy limitation and the
affluent poverty, of a Country of your Own (_comme moi, par exemple_!)
It makes you, this does, as you exquisitely say of somebody or something
at some moment, elegiac (what penetration, what delicacy in your use
there of the term!)--makes you so, that is, for the Racinian-sérieux--but
leaves you more in the desert (for everything else) that surrounds Apex
City. But you will say that you're content with your lot; that the
desert surrounding Apex City is quite enough of a dense crush for you,
and that with the _colonnade_ and the gallery and the dim river you will
always otherwise pull through. To which I can only assent--after such an
example of pulling through as The Reef. Clearly you have only to pull,
and everything will come.

These are tepid and vain remarks, for truly I am helpless. I have had
all these last days a perfect hell of an exasperation of my dire
complaint, the 11th week of which begins to-day, and have arrived at the
point really--the weariness of pain so great--of not knowing _à quel
saint me vouer_. In this despair, and because "change" at any hazard and
any cost is strongly urged upon me by both my Doctors, and is a part of
the regular process of _dénouement_ of my accursed ill, I am in all
probability trying to scramble up to London by the end of this week,
even if I have to tumble, howling, out of bed and go forth in my
bedclothes. I shall go in this case to Garlant's Hotel, Suffolk Street,
where you have already seen me, and not to my Club, which is impossible
in illness, nor to my little flat (21 Carlyle Mansions, Cheyne Walk,
Chelsea, S.W.) which will not yet, or for another three or four weeks,
be ready for me. The change to London may possibly do something toward
breaking the spell: please pray hard that it shall. Forgive too my
muddled accents and believe me, through the whole bad business, not the
less faithfully yours,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To A. F. de Navarro._


_Dictated._

/*
Lamb House, Rye.

December 12th, 1912.
*/

/*
My dear delightful Tony,
*/

Your missive, so vivid and genial, reaches me, alas, at a time of long
eclipse and depression, during which my faculties have been blighted, my
body tortured, and my resources generally exhausted.... I tell you these
dismal things to explain in the first place why I am reduced to
addressing you by this graceless machinery (I haven't written a letter
with my own poor hand for long and helpless weeks;) and in the second
place why I bring to bear on your gentle composition an intelligence
still clouded and weakened. But I have read it with sympathy, and I
think I may say, most of all with envy; so haunted with pangs, while one
tosses on the couch of pain--and mine has been, from the nature of my
situation, a poor lone and unsurrounded pallet--all one's visionary and
imaginative life; which one imputes, day by day, to happy people who
frisk among fine old gardens and oscillate between Clubs of the Arts and
Monuments of the Past. I am delighted that the Country Life people asked
you for your paper, which I find ever so lightly and brightly done, with
a touch as easy and practised as if you were the Darling of the Staff.
That is in fact exactly what I hope your paper may make you--clearly
you have the right sympathetic turn for those evocations, and I shall be
glad to think of you as evoking again and again. I only wish you hadn't
to deal this time with a house so amply modernised, in fact so renewed
altogether, save for a false front or two (or rather for a true one with
false sides and backs), as I gather Abbotswood to be. The irrepressible
Lutyens rages about us here, known at a glance by that modern note of
the archaic which has become the most banal form of our cleverness.
There is nothing left for _me_ personally to like but the little mouldy
nooks that Country Life is too proud to notice and everyone else
(including the photographers) too rich to touch with their fingers of
gold. I have too the inimitable old garden on my nerves; living here in
a great garden county I have positively almost grown to hate flowers--so
that only just now my poor contaminated little gardener is turning the
biggest border I have (scarce bigger it is true than my large unshaven
cheek) into a question, a begged question, of turf, so that we shall
presently have "chucked" Flora altogether. Forgive, however, these
morbid, _maussade_ remarks; the blue devils of a long illness still
interposing, in their insistent attitude, between my vision and your
beauty--in which I include Mary's, largely, and that of all the fine
complexion of Broadway. I return your lucid sheets with this, but make
out that, as you are to be in town only till Thursday p.m. (unless I am
mistaken), they will reach you the sooner by my sending them straight
home. My wish for their best luck go with them! I ought to mention that
under extreme push of my Doctors (for I luxuriate in Two) I am seeking
that final desperate remedy of a "change" which imposes itself at last
in a long illness, to break into the vicious circle and dissipate the
blight, by going up to town--almost straight out of bed and dangling my
bedclothes about me. This will, I trust, smash the black spell. I have
taken a small flat there ... on what appears to be a lease that will
long survive me, and there I earnestly beg you to seek me as soon as may
be after the new year. I am having first to crouch at an obscure hotel.
I embrace you Both and am in much dilapidation but all fidelity yours
always,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Henry James, junior._


/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.

January 19th, 1913.
*/

/*
Dearest Harry,
*/

I wrote, very copiously, and I hope not worryingly at all (for I only
meant to be reassuring) to your Mother yesterday, from whom I had had
two beautiful unacknowledged letters within the last days or so:
unacknowledged save for a cable, of a cheerful stamp, which I sent off
to Irving Street about a week ago, and which will have been sent on to
you. But all the while your most blest letter, written during your
Christmas moment at Cambridge, has been for me a thing to be so grateful
for that I must express to you something of it to-day--even at the risk
of a glut of information. My long silence--since I came up to town,
including, I mean, my pretty dismal weeks at that "Garlant's" of ill
association--has had a great inevitability, from several causes; but
into these I shall have gone to your Mother, whom I think I explicitly
asked to send you on my letter, and I don't want to waste force in
repetitions. It won't be repeating too much to say again what I said to
her, even with extreme emphasis, that I feel singularly justified of
this basis for my winter times in London; so much does it appear, now
that the preliminary and just postliminary strain of it is over, the
very best thing I could have done for myself. My southward position (as
to the rooms I most use) immediately over the River is verily an
"asset," and not even in the garden-room at L.H., of summer mornings,
have I been better placed for work. With which, all the detail here is
right and pleasant and workable; my servants extremely rejoice in
it--but I _am_ too much repeating!... Above all, my forenoons being by
the mercy of the Powers, whoever or whatever they are, my best time, I
have got back to work, and, with my uncanny interest in it and zeal for
it still unimpaired, feel that it must "mean something" that I am thus
reserved, after many troubles, for a productive relation with it. The
proof-sheets of "A Small Boy and Others" have been coming in upon me
rapidly--all but the very last; and it ought, by the end of next month
at furthest, to burst upon the world. Of course I shall have advance
copies sent promptly to you and to Irving Street; but, with this, I
intensely want you to take into account that the Book was written
through all these months of hampering and baffling illness. It went so
haltingly and worriedly even last winter (as distinguished from anything
I was able to do in the summer and could get at all during the last
afflicted three or four months,) last winter having really been a much
more difficult time than I could currently confess to, or than dear Bill
and Alice probably got any sense of. The point is at any rate that the
Book is now, under whatever disadvantages, wholly done, and that if it
seems "good" in spite of these, the proof of my powers, when my powers
have really worked off more of the heritage of woe of the last three
years, will be but the more substantial. A very considerable lot of
"Notes of a Son etc." is done, and I am now practically back at it with
this appearance of a free little field in spite of everything.... I
welcome immensely (what I didn't mention to your Mother--waiting to do
it thus) the valuable and delightful little collection received from you
of your Grandfather's correspondence with Emerson. What beautiful and
characteristic things in it and how I hope to be able to use the best of
these, on your Grandfather's part at least. As regards Emerson's side of
the matter I doubt whether I can do enough (in the way of extracts from
him) to make it even necessary for me to apply to Edward for licence. I
think I can hope but at the most to summarise, or give the sense of,
some of Emerson's passages; the reason of this being my absolute
presumable want of space. The Book will have to be a longer one than "A
Small Boy," but even with this there must be limits involving
suppressions and omissions. My own text I can't help attaching enough
sense and importance and value to, not to want to keep that too utterly
under, and I am more and more moved to give all of your Grandfather, on
his vivid and original side, that I possibly can. Add to this all the
application, of an illustrative kind, that I can't but see myself making
of your Dad's letters, and I see little room for any one else's; though
what I most deplore my meagre provision of is those of your Aunt Alice,
written to our parents mainly during her times, and especially her final
time, in Europe. The poverty of this resource cuts from under my feet
almost all ground for doing much, as I had rather hoped in a manner to
do, with her....

_Jan. 23rd, 1913._ I have been unable to go on with this these several
days, and yet also unwilling to let it go without saying a few more
things I wanted--so the long letter I _have_ got off to your Mother will
precede it by longer than I meant. I still write, under my disabilities
of damaged body, with difficulty (I mean perform the act of writing,)
but this is diminishing substantially though slowly--and I mainly
mention it to extenuate these clumsy characters.

My conditions (of situation etc.) here meanwhile (this winter)--I mean
these admirable and ample two rooms southward over the River, so still
and yet so animated--are ideal for work. Some other time I will explain
it to you--so far as you won't have noted it for yourself--how and why
it is that I come to be so little beforehand financially. My fatally
interrupted production of fiction began it, six years or more ago--and
that began, so utterly against my preconception of such an effect, when
I addressed myself to the so much longer and more arduous and more
fatal-to-everything-else preparation of my "edition" than had been
measurable in advance. That long period cut dreadfully into current
gains--through complete arrest of other current labour; and when it was
at last ended I had only time to do two small books (The Finer Grain and
The Outcry) before the disaster of my long illness of Jan. 1910
descended upon me and laid a paralysis on everything. This hideous
Herpetic episode and its developments have been of the absolute
continuity of that, as they now make it (I hope), dire but departing
Climax; and they have represented an interminable arrest of literary
income (to speak of.) Now that I can look to apparently again getting
back to decent continuity of work it becomes _vital_ for me to aim at
returning to the production of the Novel, my departure from which, with
its heart-breaking loss of time, was a catastrophe, a perversity and
fatality, so little dreamed of by me or intended. I yearn for it
intellectually, and with all the force of my "genius" and
imagination--artistically in short--and only when this relation is
renewed shall I be again on a normal basis. Only _how_ I want to
complete "Notes of a Son and Brother" with the last perfection first!
Which is what I shall, I trust, during the next three or four months do,
with far greater rapidity than I have done the first Book--for all last
winter and spring my forenoon, my working hours, were my worst, and for
long times so bad, and my later ones the better, whereas it is now the
other way round.

_Jan. 28th._ I have had, alas, dearest Harry, to break this off and not
take it up again--through blighted (bed-ridden) late afternoons and
whole evenings--my only letter-writing time unless I steal precious
dictation-hours from Miss Bosanquet and the Book.... My vitality, my
still sufficient cluster of vital "assets," to say nothing of my will to
live and to write, assert themselves in spite of everything. This is
5.15 on a dismal wet afternoon; I have been out, but I came in again on
purpose to get this off by to-morrow's, Wednesday's post. This apartment
grows in grace--nothing really could have been better for me. I went
into that long account, just above, of the reasons why through the
frustration of fond Fiction I have (so much illness so aiding) sunk to
this momentary _gêne_, I wanted to tell you, as against the appearance
of too squalid a helplessness--for an early return to fond fiction will
alter everything.... But what an endless sordid, illegible appeal! Take
it, dearest Harry, in all indulgence, from your lately so much-tried and
perhaps a little nervously over-anxious (by the effect of so much
suffering,) but all unconquered and devoted old Uncle,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/

P.S. A beautiful letter from your Mother of Jan. 13th (on receipt of my
cable) has just come in. All tenderest love.




_To Miss Grace Norton._


_Dictated._

/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.
Feb. 6th, 1913.
*/

/*
Dearest old friend!
*/

Don't shudder, I beg you, at the sight of this grim legibility--even
when you compare it with your own exquisite mastery of legibility
without grimness! Let me down easily, in view of the long, the oh so
much _too_ long, ordeal that has pressed on me, and that has so hampered
and hindered and harrowed me, that almost any sort of making shift to
project my sentiments to a distance is a sort of victory won, or patch
of ground wrested, from darkness and the devil! I am slowly slowly
getting better of an interminable complicated siege of pain and
distress; but it has left me with arrears of every sort piled up around
me like the wild fragments of some convulsion of Nature, and I pick my
way, or grope it, or even feebly and fatally fail of it, as I best can.
There are things that help, withal, and one of these has been to receive
your all-benignant little letter of two days ago. I needn't reaffirm to
you at this time of day that all your long patiences and fidelities, all
your generosities and gallantries of always rallying yet again, are
always more beautiful to me than I ever seem to have managed
_punctually_ enough to help you, if need be, to feel--especially as of
any such urgent "help" there need be no question now! You have had
enough news of me from over your way, I infer, pretty dismal though it
may have been, for me not to want fatuously to dose you with it (I mean
given its bitter quality) further or at first hand; therefore let me
rather convey to you at first hand that I am getting into distinctly
less pitiful case.... I have been too complicated a sufferer for it to
clear at every point at the same time; but the general sense is ever so
much better--and I am going to ask of your charity to let Alice, over
the way, see these yearning pages, for her better reassurance--even if I
have after a fashion managed, just of late, to reassure her more
directly. I want her to have all the testimony I can treat her, and, by
the same token, my dear Grace, treat _you_ to.

Your little letter breathes all your characteristic courage and
philosophy--while, I confess, at the same time, it fills out--or rather
perhaps, more exactly, further removes the veil from--my in its very
nature vivid enough picture of your fairly august state of lone
Cambridge survivorship. I admired you on that state at closer quarters
winter before last--even though my testimony to my so doing was at that
time, from poor physical interferences, hampered and awkward; but
History is so interesting when one is able to follow with closeness a
particular attaching strain of it that my imagination, my intention, my
affection and fidelity, hang and hover about your own particular noble
exhibition of it as intelligently (yes, my dear Grace, as intelligently,
nothing less, I insist) as you could possibly desire or put up with!
Your letter fills in again for me a passage or two of detail--so that I
feel myself the more possessed and qualified.... What I mean is above
all that even this imperfect snatch of talk with you is dear and blest
to me, and that if by hook or by crook, and through whatever densities
of medium and distance, I draw out a little the sense of relation with
you, it will have been better than utter frustration. I look out here,
while I thus communicate, from a bit of the old-time stretch of
riverside Chelsea, my first far-away glimpse or sense of which has, like
so many of my first London glimpses and senses (my very first of all, I
mean,) a never-lost association with you and yours, or at least with
yours and thereby with you: which means my having come here first of
all, one day of the early spring of 1869, with Charles and Susan, they
having in their kindness brought me to call with them on the great (_if_
great!) and strange and more or less sinister D. G. Rossetti, whom
Charles was in good relation with, difficult as that appeared already
then to have become for most people, and my impression of whom on the
occasion, with everything else of it, I have always closely retained.
Part of it was just this impression of the really interesting and
delightful old Thames-side Chelsea, over the admirable water-view of
which these windows now hang--quite as if I had then secretly vowed to
myself that some window of mine some day should. The River is more
pompously embanked (making an admirable walk all the way to Westminster,
of the most salutary value to me when I can at the soberest of paces
attempt it;) but the sense of it all goes back, as I say, to my fond
participation in that prehistoric Queen's Gate Terrace Winter. However,
I am drenching you with numbered pages--I ask no credit for the
number!--and I almost sit with you while you read them; not exactly
watching for a glow of rapture on your face, but still, on the whole,
seeing you take them, without a frown, for a good intention and a
stopgap for something better. You tell me almost nothing of yourself,
but all my sympathy and fidelity wait on you (sympathy always _can_ come
in somewhere!) and I am yours, my dear Grace, always all faithfully,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Mrs. Henry White._


_Dictated._

/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.
Feb. 23rd, 1913.
*/

/*
My dear old Friend,
*/

Let this mechanic form and vulgar legibility notify you a little at the
start that I am in rather a hampered and hindered state, and that that
must plead both for my delay in acknowledging your dear faithful letter
of the New Year time, and for my at last having to make the best of this
too impersonal art.... I won't go into the history of my woes--all the
more that I really hope I have shuffled the worst of them off. Even in
this most recent form they have been part and parcel of the grave
illness that overtook me as long ago as at the New Year, 1910, and with
a very imperfect recovery from which I was struggling during those weary
American months of winter-before-last when we planned so in vain that I
should come to you in Washington. I have deeply regretted, ever since,
my failure of that pleasure--all the more that I don't see it now as
conceivably again within my reach. I am restored to this soil, for
whatever may remain to me of my mortal career. The grand swing across
the globe, which you and Harry will again nobly accomplish--again and
yet again--now simply mocks at my weakness and my reduced resources.
Besides, I am but too thankful to have a refuge in which _continuously_
to crouch. Please fix well in your mind that continuity--as making it
easy for you some day to find me here. The continuity is broken simply
by my reverting to the country for the summer and autumn--a mere change
from the blue bed to the brown, and then from the brown back again to
this Thames-side perch, which I call the blue. I hang here, for six
months, straight over the River and find it delightful and interesting,
at once ever so quiet and ever so animated. The River has a quantity of
picturesque and dramatic life and motion that one had never appreciated
till one had thrown oneself on it _de confiance_. But it's another
London, this old Chelsea of simplifications and sacrifices, from the
world in which I so like to feel that I for so long lived more or less
_with_ you. I feel somehow as much away from that now as you and Harry
must feel amid your new Washington horizons--and it has of itself, for
that matter, gone to pieces under the sweep of the big broom of Time,
which has scattered it without ceremony. A few vague and altered relics
of it occasionally dangle for a moment before me. I was going to say
"cross my path"--but I haven't now such a thing as a path, or it goes
such a very few steps. I try meanwhile to project myself in imagination
into your Washington existence--and, besides your own allusions to it, a
passing visit a few days since from Walter Berry helped me a little to
fix the shining vision. W. B. had been, I gathered, but a day or two
near you, and wasn't in possession of many particulars. Beyond this,
too, though you shine to me you shine a bit fearfully--for I can't rid
myself (in a world of Chelsea limits and fashions) of a sense of the
_formidable_, the somehow--at least for the likes of _me_!--difficult
and bristling and glaring, side of the American conditions. However, you
of course lightly ride the whirlwind--or at any rate have only as much
or as little of the storms as you will, and can pick out of it only such
musical thunder-rolls and most purely playful forked lightnings as suit
you best. What I mean is that here, after a fashion, a certain part of
the work of discrimination and selection and primary clearing of the
ground is already done for one, in a manner that enables one to begin,
for one's self, further on or higher up; whereas over there I seemed to
see myself, speaking only from my own experience, often beginning so
"low down," just in that way of sifting and selecting, that all one's
time went to it and one was spent before arriving at any very charming
altitude. This you will find obscure, but study it well--though strictly
in private, so as not to give me away as a sniffy critic. Heaven knows I
indulge in the most remorseless habits of criticism _here_--even if I
make no great public use of them, through the increasing privacy and
antiquity of my life. I kind of wonder about the bearing of the queer
Democratic régime that seems as yet so obscurely to loom upon any latent
possibilities (that might have been) on Harry's and your "career"--just
as I wonder what unutterable queerness may not, as a feature of the
whole conundrum, "representatively" speaking, before long cause us all
here to sit up and stare: one or two such startling rumours about the
matter, I trust groundless, having already had something of that effect.
But we must all wait, mustn't we? and I do indeed envy you both your so
interesting opportunity for doing so, in a front box at the comedy, or
tragedy, the fine old American show, that is, whatever turn it takes: it
will all give you, these next months, so much to look at and talk about
and expertly appreciate. Lord, how I wish I were in a state or situation
to be dining with you to-night! I am dying, really, to see your
House--which means alas that I shall die without doing so. No glimmer of
a view of the new Presidential family as a White House group has come my
way--so that I sit in darkness there as all around, and feel you can but
say that it serves me right not to have managed my life
better--especially with your grand example! Amen, amen!...

I rejoice to hear of your having had your grand-children with you,
though you speak, bewilderingly, as if they had leaped across the globe
in happy exemption from parents--or a parent. However, nothing does
surprise me now--almost any kind of globe-leaping affects me, in my
_trou_, as natural, possible, nay probable! I pat Harry ever so
affectionately on the back, I hold you both in the most affectionate
remembrance, and am yours all faithfully,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Mrs. William James._


_Dictated._

/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.
March 5th, 1913.
*/

/*
Dearest Alice,
*/

An extreme blessing to me is your dear letter from Montreal. I had
lately much longed to hear from you--and when do I not?--and had sent
you a message to that effect in writing to Harry a week ago. Really to
have some of your facts and your current picture straight from yourself
is better than anything else....

I write you this in conditions that give me for the hour, this
morning-hour, toward noon, such a sense of the possible beneficence of
Climate, relenting ethereal mildness, so long and so far as one can at
all come by it. We have been having, as I believe you have, a blessedly
mild winter, and the climax at this moment is a kind of all uncannily
premature May-day of softness and beauty. I sit here with my big south
window open to the River, open wide, and a sort of healing balm of
sunshine flooding the place. Truly I feel I did well for myself in
perching--even thus modestly for a "real home"--just on this spot. My
beginnings of going out again have consisted, up to to-day, in four
successive excursions in a Bath-chair--every command of which resource
is installed but little more than round the corner from me; and the
Bath-chair habit or vice is, I fear, only too capable now of marking me
for its own. This of course not "really"--my excellent legs are, thank
heaven, still too cherished a dependence and resource and remedy to me
in the long run, or rather in the long (or even the short) crawl; only,
if you've never tried it, the B.C. has a sweet appeal of its own, for
contemplative ventilation; and I builded better than I knew when I
happened to settle here, just where, in all London, the long, long,
smooth and really charming and beguiling Thames-side Embankment offers
it a quite ideal course for combined publicity (in the sense of variety)
and tranquillity (in the sense of jostling against nobody and nothing
and not having to pick one's steps.) Add to this that just at hand,
straight across the River, by the ample and also very quiet Albert
Bridge, lies the large convenient and in its way also very beguiling
Battersea Park: which you may but too unspeakably remember our making
something of the circuit of with William on that day of the so troubled
fortnight in London, after our return from Nauheim, when Theodate Pope
called for us in her great car and we came first to just round the
corner here, where he and I sat waiting together outside while you and
she went into Carlyle's house. Every moment of that day has again and
again pressed back upon me here--and how, rather suddenly, we had, in
the park, where we went afterwards, to pull up, that is to turn and get
back to the sinister little Symonds's as soon as possible. However. I
don't know why I should stir that dismal memory. The way the "general
location" seems propitious to me ought to succeed in soothing the nerves
of association. This last I keep saying--I mean in the sense that,
especially on such a morning as this, I quite adore this form of
residence (this particular perch I mean) in order to make fully sure of
what I have of soothing and reassuring to tell you.... Lamb House hangs
before me from this simplified standpoint here as a rather complicated
haze; but I tend, I truly feel, to overdo that view of it--and shan't
_settle_ to any view at all for another year. It is the mere worriment
of dragged-out unwellness that makes me see things in wrong dimensions.
They right themselves perfectly at better periods. But I mustn't yet
discourse too long: I am still under restriction as to uttering too much
vocal sound; and I feel how guarding and nursing the vocal resource is
beneficial and helpful. I don't speak to you of Harry--there would be
too much to say and he must shine upon you even from N.Y. with so big a
light of his own. I take him, and I take you all, to have been much
moved by Woodrow Wilson's fine, and clearly so sincere, even if so
partial and provisional address yesterday. It isn't he, but it is the so
long and so deeply provincialised and diseducated and, I fear--in
respect to individual activity and operative, that is administrative
value--very below-the-mark "personalities" of the Democratic party, that
one is pretty dismally anxious about. An administration that has to
"take on" Bryan looks, from the overhere point of view, like the
queerest and crudest of all things! But of course I may not know what
I'm talking about save when I thus embrace you all, almost principally
Peg--_and_ your Mother!--again and am your ever affectionate

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Bruce Porter._

/#
     The beginning and end of this letter are accidentally missing.
#/


/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.
[March, 1913.]
*/

...a better one than for a long, long while; and it enables this poor
scrawl thus to try to hang itself, for the hour, however awkwardly,
round your neck. What was wonderful and beautiful in your letter of last
November 9th (now so handsomely and liveably before me--I adore your
hand) is that it was prompted, to the last perfection, by a sublime
sense of what was just exactly my case at that hour, so that when I
think of this, and of how I felt it when the letter came, and of how
exquisite and interesting that essential fact made it (over and above
its essential charm,) I don't know whether I am most amazed or ashamed
at my not having as nearly as possible just then and there acclaimed the
touching marvel. But in truth this very fact of the _justesse_ of your
globe-spanning divination is the real answer to that. You wrote because
you so beautifully and suddenly _saw_ from afar (and so admirably wanted
to lay your hand on me in consequence:) saw, I mean, that I was in some
acute trouble, and had the heavenly wish to signal to me your
sympathetic sense of it. So, as I say, your admirable page itself tells
me, and so at the hour I hailed the sweet phenomenon. I had had a very
bad summer, but hoped (and supposed) I was more or less throwing it off.
But the points I make are, 1st, that your psychic sense of the situation
had absolutely coincided in time, and in California, with what was going
on at Lamb House, on the other side of the globe; and 2nd, after all,
that precisely the condition so revealed to you was what made it too
difficult for me to vibrate back to you with any proportionate
punctuality or grace. Only _this_, you see, is my long-delayed and
comparatively dull vibration. Here I am, at any rate, dearest Bruce,
taking you as straight again to my aged heart as these poor clumsy
methods will allow. Thank God meanwhile I have no supernatural fears
about _you_! nor vain dreams that you are not in the living equilibrium,
now as ever, that becomes you best, and of which you have the brave
secret. I am incapable of doubting of this--though after all I now feel
how exceedingly I should like you to tell me so even if but on one side
of a sheet like this so handsome (I come back to that!) example that I
have before me. You can do so much with one side of a sheet. But oh for
a better approach to a real personal _jaw_! It is indeed most strange,
this intimate relation of ours that has been doomed to consist of a
grain of contact (_et encore!_) to a ton of separation. It's to the
honour of us anyhow that we _can_ and do keep touching without the more
platitudinous kind of demonstration of it. Still--demonstrate, as I say,
for three minutes. Feel a little, to help you to it, how tenderly I lay
my hands on you. This address will find me till the end of June--but
Lamb House of course always. I have taken three or four (or five) years'
lease of a small flat on this pleasant old Chelsea riverside to
hibernate in for the future. I return to the country for five or six
months of summer and autumn, but can't stand the utter solitude and
confinement of it from December to the spring's end. Ah, had we only a
climate!--yours or Fanny Stevenson's (if she is still the exploiter of
climates)--I believe I should be all right then! Tell me of her--and
tell me of your Mother. I am sending you by the Scribners a volume of
reminiscential twaddle....




_To Lady Ritchie._

/#
     Lady Ritchie had at this time thoughts (afterwards abandoned) of
     going to America. She was the "Princess Royal," of course, as the
     daughter of Thackeray.
#/


/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.
March 25th, 1913.
*/

/*
Dearest old Friend!
*/

I am deeply interested and touched by your letter from the Island!--so
much so that I shall indeed rush to you this (day-after-to-morrow)
Thursday at 5.15. Your idea is (as regards your sainted Self!) of the
bravest and most ingenious, but needing no end of things to be said
about it--and I think I shall be able to say them _ALL_! The _furore_
you would excite there, the glory in which you would swim (or sink!)
would be of an ineffable resonance and effulgence; but I fear it would
simply be a _fatal_ Apotheosis, a prostrating exaltation. The devil of
the thing (for yourself) would be that that terrific country is in every
pulse of its being and on every inch of its surface a roaring
repudiation and negation of anything like Privacy, and of the blinding
and deafening Publicity you might come near to perish. _But_ we will jaw
about it--there is so much to say--and for Hester it would be another
matter: _she_ could ride the whirlwind and enjoy, in a manner, the
storm. Besides, _she_ isn't the Princess Royal--but only _a remove_ of
the Blood! Again, however, _nous en causerons_--on Thursday. I shall so
hug the chance.... I am impatient for it and am yours and the Child's
all so faithfully,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Mrs. William James._

/#
     The offering to Henry James from his friends in England on his
     seventieth birthday (April 15, 1913) took the form of a letter, a
     piece of plate (described in the following), and a request that he
     would sit for his portrait.
#/


/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.
April 1st, 1913.
*/

/*
Dearest Alice,
*/

Today comes blessedly your letter of the 18th, written after the receipt
of my cable to you in answer to your preceding one of the 6th (after you
had heard from Robert Allerton of my illness.) You will have been
reassured further--I mean beyond my cable--by a letter I lately
despatched to Bill and Alice conjointly, in which I told them of my good
and continued improvement. I am going on very well, increasingly so--in
spite of my having to reckon with so much chronic pectoral pain, now so
seated and settled, of the queer "falsely anginal" but none the less,
when it is bad, distressing order.... Moreover too it is astonishing
with how much pain one can with long practice learn constantly and not
too defeatedly to live. Therefore, dearest Alice, don't think of this as
too black a picture of my situation: it is so much brighter a one than I
have thought at certain bad moments and seasons of the past that I
should probably ever be able to paint. The mere power to work in such
measure as I can is an infinite help to a better consciousness--and
though so impaired compared to what it used to be, it tends to grow,
distinctly--which by itself proves that I have some firm ground under my
feet. And I repeat to satiety that my conditions _here_ are admirably
helpful and favouring.

You can see, can't you? how strange and desperate it would be to "chuck"
everything up, Lamb House, servants, Miss Bosanquet, _this_ newly
acquired and prized resource, to come over, by a formidable and
expensive journey, to spend a summer in the (at best) to me torrid and
(the inmost inside of 95 apart) utterly arid and vacuous Cambridge.
Dearest Alice, I could come back to America (could be carried back on a
stretcher) to die--but never, never to live. To say how the question
affects me is dreadfully difficult because of its appearing so to make
light of you and the children--but when I think of how little Boston and
Cambridge were of old ever _my_ affair, or anything but an accident, for
me, of the parental life there to which I occasionally and painfully and
losingly sacrificed, I have a superstitious terror of seeing them at the
end of time again stretch out strange inevitable tentacles to draw me
back and destroy me. And then I could never either make or afford the
journey (I have no margin at all for _that_ degree of effort.) But you
will have understood too well--without my saying more--how little I can
dream of any déplacement now--especially for the sake of a milieu in
which you and Peg and Bill and Alice and Aleck would be burdened with
the charge of making up _all_ my life.... You see my capital--yielding
all my income, intellectual, social, associational, on the old
investment of so many years--my capital is _here_, and to let it all
slide would be simply to become bankrupt. Oh if you only, on the other
hand, you and Peg and Aleck, _could_ walk beside my bath-chair down this
brave Thames-side I would get back into it again (it was some three
weeks ago dismissed,) and half live there for the sake of your company.
I have a kind of sense that you would be able to live rather pleasantly
near me here--if you could once get planted. But of course I on my side
understand all your present complications.

_April 16th!_ It's really too dismal, dearest Alice, that, breaking off
the above at the hour I _had_ to, I have been unable to go on with it
for so many days. It's now more than a fortnight old; still, though my
check was owing to my having of a sudden, just as I rested my pen, to
drop perversely into a less decent phase (than I reported to you at the
moment of writing) and [from which I] have had with some difficulty to
wriggle up again, I am now none the less able to send you no too bad
news. I have wriggled up a good deal, and still keep believing in my
capacity to wriggle up in general.... Suffice if for the moment that I
just couldn't, for the time, drive the pen myself--when I am "bad" I
feel too demoralised, too debilitated, for this; and it doesn't at all
do for me then to push against the grain. Don't feel, all the same, that
if I resort this morning to the present help, it is because I am _not_
feeling differently--for I really am in an easier way again (I mean of
course specifically and "anginally" speaking) and the circumstances of
the hour a good deal explain my proceeding thus. I had yesterday a
Birthday, an extraordinary, prodigious, portentous, quite public
Birthday, of all things in the world, and it has piled up
acknowledgments and supposedly delightful complications and arrears at
such a rate all round me that in short, Miss Bosanquet being here, I
today at least throw myself upon her aid for getting on
correspondentially--instead of attending to my proper work, which has,
however, kept going none so badly in spite of my last poor fortnight. I
will tell you in a moment of my signal honours, but want to mention
first that your good note written on receipt of A Small Boy has
meanwhile come to me and by the perfect fulness of its appreciation gave
me the greatest joy. There are several things I want to say to you
about the shape and substance of the book--and I will yet; only now I
want to get this off absolutely by today's American post, and tell you
about the Honours, a little, before you wonder, in comparative darkness,
over whatever there may have been in the American papers that you will
perhaps have seen; though in two or three of the New York ones more
possibly than in the Boston. I send you by this post a copy of
yesterday's Times and one of the Pall Mall Gazette--the two or three
passages in which, together, I suppose to have been more probably than
not reproduced in N. Y. But I send you above all a copy of the really
very beautiful Letter ... ushering in the quite wonderful array of
signatures (as I can't but feel) of my testifying and "presenting"
friends: a list of which you perhaps can't quite measure the very
charming and distinguished and "brilliant" character without knowing
your London better. What I wish I _could_ send you is the huge harvest
of exquisite, of splendid sheaves of flowers that converted a goodly
table in this room, by the time yesterday was waning, into such a
blooming garden of complimentary colour as I never dreamed I should, on
my own modest premises, almost bewilderedly stare at, sniff at, all but
quite "cry" at. I think I must and shall in fact compass sending you a
photograph of the still more glittering tribute dropped upon me--a
really splendid "golden bowl," of the highest interest and most perfect
taste, which would, in the extremity of its elegance, be too proudly
false a note amid my small belongings here if it didn't happen to fit,
or to sit, rather, with perfect grace and comfort, on the middle of my
chimney-piece, where the rather good glass and some other happy
accidents of tone most fortunately consort with it. It is a very brave
and artistic (exact) reproduction of a piece of old Charles II plate;
the bowl or cup having handles and a particularly charming lid or
cover, and standing on an ample round tray or salver; the whole being
wrought in solid silver-gilt and covered over with quaint incised little
figures of a (in the taste of the time) Chinese intention. In short it's
a very beautiful and honourable thing indeed.... Against the _giving to
me_ of the Portrait, presumably by Sargent, if I do succeed in being
able to sit for it, I have absolutely and successfully protested. The
possession, the attribution or ownership of it, I have insisted, shall
be only their matter, that of the subscribing friends. I am sending
Harry a copy of the Letter too--but do send him on this as well. You see
there _must_ be good life in me still when I can gabble so hard. The
Book appears to be really most handsomely received hereabouts. It is
being treated in fact with the very highest consideration. I hope it is
viewed a little in some such mannerly light roundabout yourselves, but I
really call for no "notices" whatever. I don't in the least want 'em.
What I _do_ want is to personally and firmly and intimately encircle Peg
and Aleck and their Mother and squeeze them as hard together as is
compatible with squeezing them so tenderly! With this _tide_ of gabble
you will surely feel that I shall soon be at you again. And so I shall!
Yours, dearest Alice, and dearest all, ever so and ever so!

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Percy Lubbock._

/#
     A copy of H. J.'s letter of thanks was sent to each of the
     subscribers to the birthday present. He eventually preferred that
     their names should be given in a postscript to his letter, which
     follows in its final form.
#/


_Dictated._

/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.
April 21st, 1913.
*/

/*
My dear blest Percy!
*/

I enclose you herewith a sort of provisional apology for a Form of
Thanks! Read it and tell me on Wednesday, when I count on you at 1.45,
whether you think it will do--as being on the one hand not too pompous
or important and on the other not too free and easy. I have tried to
steer a middle way between hysterical emotion and marble immortality! To
any emendation you suggest I will give the eagerest ear, though I have
really considered and pondered my expression not a little, studying the
pro's and con's as to each _tour_. However, we will earnestly speak of
it. The question of exactly where and how my addresses had best figure
when the thing is reduced to print you will perhaps have your idea
about. For it must seem to you, as it certainly does to me, that their
names must in common decency be all drawn out again.... But you will
pronounce when we meet--heaven speed the hour!

Yours, my dear Percy, more than ever constantly,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/

P.S. It seems to me that the little arrangement that really almost
_imposes_ itself would be that the Printed Thing should begin with my
date and address and my Dear Friends All; and that the full list,
taking even three complete pages or whatever, should then and there draw
itself out; after which, as a fresh paragraph, the body of my little
text should begin. Anything else affects me as _more_ awkward; and I
seem to see you in full agreement with me as to the absolute necessity
that every Signer, without exception, shall be addressed.




_To two hundred and seventy Friends._


/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.

April 21st, 1913.
*/

/*
Dear Friends All,
*/

Let me acknowledge with boundless pleasure the singularly generous and
beautiful letter, signed by your great and dazzling array and reinforced
by a correspondingly bright material gage, which reached me on my recent
birthday, April 15th. It has moved me as brave gifts and benedictions
can only do when they come as signal surprises. I seem to wake up to an
air of breathing good will the full sweetness of which I had never yet
tasted; though I ask myself now, as a second thought, how the large
kindness and hospitality in which I have so long and so consciously
lived among you could fail to act itself out according to its genial
nature and by some inspired application. The perfect grace with which it
has embraced the just-past occasion for its happy thought affects me, I
ask you to believe, with an emotion too deep for stammering words. I was
drawn to London long years ago as by the sense, felt from still earlier,
of all the interest and association I should find here, and I now see
how my faith was to sink deeper foundations than I could presume ever to
measure--how my justification was both stoutly to grow and wisely to
wait. It is so wonderful indeed to me as I count up your numerous and
various, your dear and distinguished friendly names, taking in all they
recall and represent, that I permit myself to feel at once highly
successful and extremely proud. I had never in the least understood that
I was the one or signified that I was the other, but you have made a
great difference. You tell me together, making one rich tone of your
many voices, almost the whole story of my social experience, which I
have reached the right point for living over again, with all manner of
old times and places renewed, old wonderments and pleasures reappeased
and recaptured--so that there is scarce one of your ranged company but
makes good the particular connection, quickens the excellent relation,
lights some happy train and flushes with some individual colour. I pay
you my very best respects while I receive from your two hundred and
fifty pair of hands, and more, the admirable, the inestimable bowl, and
while I engage to sit, with every accommodation to the so markedly
indicated "one of you," my illustrious friend Sargent. With every
accommodation, I say, but with this one condition that you yourselves,
in your strength and goodness, remain guardians of the result of his
labour--even as I remain all faithfully and gratefully yours,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/

P.S. And let me say over your names.

[There follows the list of the two hundred and seventy subscribers to
the birthday gift.]




_To Mrs. G. W. Prothero._

/#
     Mr. and Mrs. Prothero, already at Rye, had suggested that H. J.
     should go to Lamb House for Whitsuntide.
#/


_Dictated._

/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.

April 30th, 1913.
*/

/*
Best of Friends Both!
*/

Oh it is a dream of delight, but I should have to climb a perpendicular
mountain first. Your accents are all but irresistible, and your company
divinely desirable, but if you knew how thoroughly, and for such
innumerable good reasons, I am seated here till I am able to leave for a
real and workable absence, you would do my poor plea of impossibility
justice. I have just conversed with Joan and Kidd, conversed so affably,
not to say lovingly, in the luminous kitchen, which somehow let in a
derisive glare upon every cranny and crevice of the infatuated scheme.
With this fierce light there mingled the respectful jeers of the two
ladies themselves, which rose to a mocking (though still deeply
deferential) climax for the picture of their polishing off, or dragging
violently out of bed, the so dormant and tucked-in house in the ideal
couple of hours. Before their attitude I lowered my lance--easily
understanding moreover that their round of London gaieties is still so
fresh and spiced a cup to them that to feel it removed from their lips
even for a moment is almost more than they can bear. And then the coarse
and brutal truth is, further that I am oh so utterly well fixed here for
the moment and so void of physical agility for any kind of somersault. A
little while back, while the Birthday raged, I did just look about me
for an off-corner; but now there has been a drop and, the best calm of
Whitsuntide descending on the scene here, I feel it would be a kind of
lapse of logic to hurry off to where the social wave, hurrying ahead of
me, would be breaking on a holiday strand. I _am_ so abjectly, so
ignobly fond of not "travelling." To keep up not doing it is in itself
for me the most thrilling of adventures. And I am working so well
(unberufen!) with my admirable Secretary; I shouldn't really dare to ask
her to join our little caravan, raising it to the number of five, for a
fresh tuning-up again. And on the other hand I mayn't now abandon what I
am fatuously pleased to call my work for a single precious hour. Forgive
my beastly rudeness. I will write more in a day or two. Do loll in the
garden yourselves to your very fill; do cultivate George's geniality; do
steal any volume or set of volumes out of the house that you may like;
and do still think gently of your poor ponderous and thereby, don't you
see? so permanent, old friend,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To William James, junior._


_Dictated._

/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.

June 18th, 1913.
*/

/*
Dearest Bill,
*/

I suppose myself to be trying to-day to get off a brief response both to
Harry and to dear Peg (whom I owe, much rather, volumes of
acknowledgment to;) but I put in first these few words to you and
Alice--for the quite wrong reason that the couple of notes just received
from you are those that have last come. This is because I feel as if I
had worried you a good bit more than helped over the so interesting
name-question of the Babe. It wasn't so much an attempted solution, at
all, that I the other week hastily rushed into, but only a word or two
that I felt I absolutely had to utter, for my own relief, by way of
warning against our reembarking, any of us, on a fresh and possibly
interminable career of the tiresome and graceless "Junior." You see I
myself suffered from that tag to help out my identity for forty years,
greatly disliking it all the while, and with my dislike never in the
least understood or my state pitied; and I felt I couldn't be dumb if
there was any danger of your Boy's being started unguardedly and _de
gaieté de coeur_ on a like long course; so probably and desirably
_very_ very long in his case, given your youth and "prominence," in
short your immortal duration. It seemed to me I ought to do _something_
to conjure away the danger, though I couldn't go into the matter of
exactly _what_, at all, as if we were only, and most delightfully,
talking it over at our leisure and face to face--face to face with the
Babe, I mean; as I wish to goodness we were! The different modes of
evasion or attenuation, in that American world where designations are so
bare and variations, of the accruing or "social" kind, so few, are
difficult to go into this distance; and in short all that I meant at all
by my attack was just a Hint! I feel so for poor dear Harry's carrying
of _his_ tag--and as if I myself were directly responsible for it!
However, no more of that.

To this machinery the complications arising from the socially so fierce
London June inevitably (and in fact mercifully) drive me; for I feel the
assault, the attack on one's time and one's strength, even in my so
simplified and disqualified state; which it is my one great effort not
to allow to be knocked about. However, I of course do succeed in
simplifying and in guarding myself enormously; one can't but succeed
when the question is so vital as it has now become with me. Which is
really but a preface to telling you how much the most interesting thing
in the matter has been, during the last three weeks, my regular sittings
for my portrait to Sargent; which have numbered now some seven or eight,
I forget which, and with but a couple more to come. So the thing is, I
make out, very nearly finished, and the head apparently (as I much hope)
to have almost nothing more done to it. It is, I infer, a very great
success; a number of the competent and intelligent have seen it, and so
pronounce it in the strongest terms.... In short it seems likely to be
one of S.'s very fine things. One is almost full-face, with one's left
arm over the corner of one's chair-back and the hand brought round so
that the thumb is caught in the arm-hole of one's waistcoat, and said
hand therefore, with the fingers a bit folded, entirely visible and
"treated." Of course I'm sitting a little askance in the chair. The
canvas comes down to just where my watch-chain (such as it is, poor
thing!) is hung across the waistcoat: which latter, in itself, is found
to be splendidly (poor thing though it also be) and most interestingly
treated. Sargent _can_ make such things so interesting--such things as
my coat-lappet and shoulder and sleeve too! But what is most
interesting, every one is agreed, is the mouth--than which even he has
never painted a more living and, as I am told, "expressive"! In fact I
can quite see that myself; and really, I seem to feel, the thing will be
all that can at the best (the best with such a subject!) have been
expected of it. I only wish you and Alice had assisted at some of the
sittings--as Sargent likes animated, sympathetic, beautiful, talkative
friends to do, in order to correct by their presence too lugubrious
expressions. I take for granted I shall before long have a photograph to
send you, and then you will be able partially to judge for yourselves.

I grieve over your somewhat sorry account of your own winter record of
work, though I allow in it for your habitual extravagance of blackness.
Evidently the real meaning of it is that you are getting so _fort_ all
the while that you kick every rung of your ladder away from under you,
by mere uncontrollable force, as you mount and mount. But the rungs, I
trust, are all the while being carefully picked up, far below, and
treasured; this being Alice's, to say nothing of anybody else's, natural
care and duty. Give all my love to her and to the beautiful nursing
scrap! I want to say thirty things more to her, but my saying power is
too finite a quantity. I gather that this will find you happily, and I
trust very conveniently and workably, settled at Chocorua--where may the
summer be blest to you, and the thermometer low, and the motor-runs
many! Now I really have to get at Harry! But do send this in any case on
to Irving Street, for the sake of the report of the picture. I want them
to have the good news of it without delay.

/*
Yours both all affectionately,

HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Miss Rhoda Broughton._


_Dictated._

/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.
June 25th, 1913.
*/

/*
My dear Rhoda,
*/

I reply to your quite acclaimed letter--if there can be an acclamation
of _one_!--by this mechanic aid for the simple reason that, much
handicapped as to the free brandish of arm and hand nowadays, I find
that the letters thus helped out do get written, whereas those I am too
shy or too fearsome or too ceremonious to think anything but my poor
scratch of a pen good enough for simply don't come into existence at
all. It greatly touches me at any rate to get news of you by your own
undiscouraged hand; and it kind of cheers me up about you generally,
during your exile from this blest town (which you see _I_ continue to
bless), that you appear to be in some degree "on the go," and capable of
the brave exploit of a country visit. With a Brother to offer you a
garden-riot of roses, however, I don't wonder, but the more rejoice,
that you were inspired and have been sustained.

Yes, thank you, dear F. Prothero was veracious about the Portrait, as
she is about everything: it is now finished, _parachevé_ (I sat for the
last time a couple of days ago;) and is nothing less evidently, than a
very fine thing indeed, Sargent at his very best and poor H. J. not at
his worst; in short a living breathing likeness and a masterpiece of
painting. I am really quite ashamed to admire it so much and so
loudly--it's so much as if I were calling attention to my own fine
points. I don't, alas, exhibit a "point" in it, but am all large and
luscious rotundity--by which you may see how true a thing it is. And I
am sorry to have ceased to sit, in spite of the repeated big holes it
made in my precious mornings: J. S. S. being so genial and delightful a
_nature de grand maître_ to have to do with, and his beautiful high cool
studio, opening upon a balcony that overhangs a charming Chelsea green
garden, adding a charm to everything. He liked always a friend or two to
be in to break the spell of a settled gloom in my countenance by their
prattle; though you will doubtless think this effect but little achieved
when I tell you that, having myself found the thing, as it grew, more
and more like Sir Joshua's Dr. Johnson, and said so, a perceptive
friend reinforced me a couple of sittings later by breaking out
irrepressibly with the same judgment....

I am sticking on in London, you see, and have got distinctly better with
the lapse of the weeks. In fact dear old Town, taken on the absolutely
simplified and restricted terms in which I insist on taking it (as
compared with all the ancient storm and stress), is distinctly good for
me, and the weather keeping cool--absit omen!--I am not in a hurry to
flee. I shall go to Rye, none the less, within a fortnight. I have just
heard with distress that dear Norris has come and gone without making me
a sign (I learn by telephone from his club that he left yesterday.) This
has of course been "consideration," but damn _such_ consideration. My
imagination, soaring over the interval, hangs fondly about the time,
next autumn, when you will be, D.V., restored to Cadogan Gardens. I am
impatient for my return hither before I have so much as really prepared
to go. May the months meanwhile lie light on you! Yours, my dear Rhoda,
all faithfully,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Mrs. Alfred Sutro._

/#
     H. J. had been with Mrs. Sutro to a performance of Henry
     Bernstein's play, _Le Secret_, with Mme. Simone in the principal
     part.
#/


_Dictated._

/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.
June 25th, 1913.
*/

/*
Dear Mrs. Sutro,
*/

Yes, what a sad history of struggles against fate the recital of our
whole failure to achieve yesterday in Tite Street does make! It was a
sorry business my not having been able to wire you on Saturday, but it
wasn't till the Sunday sitting that the change to the Tuesday from the
probable Wednesday (through the latter's having become impossible,
unexpectedly, to Sargent) was settled. And yesterday was the last, the
real last time--it terminated even at 12.30. Any touch more would be
simply detrimental, and the hand, to my sense, is now all admirably
there. But you must see it some day when you are naturally in town--I
can easily arrange for that. I shall be there, I seem to make out, for a
considerable number of days yet: Mrs. Wharton comes over from Paris on
the 30th for a week, however, and, I apprehend, will catch me up in
_her_ relentless Car (pardon any apparent invidious comparison!) for
most of the time she is here. That at least is her present programme,
but _souvent femme varie_, and that lady not least. I am addressing you,
you see, after this mechanic fashion, without apology, for the excellent
reason that during these forenoon hours it is my so much the most
_expéditif_ way....

Almost more than missing the séance (to which, by the way, Hedworth
Williamson came in just at the last with Mrs. Hunter) do I miss talking
with you of Le Secret last night and of the wondrous demoniac little
Simone; though of the play, and of Bernstein's extraordinary theatric
art themselves more than anything else. I think our friend the Critic
said beautifully right things about them in yesterday's Times--but it
would be so interesting to have the matter out in more of its aspects
too.... What most remains with one, in brief, is that the play somehow
represents a Case merely, as distinguished, so to speak, from a
Situation; the Case being always a thing rather void of connections with
and into life at large, and the Situation, dramatically speaking, being
largely of interest just by _having_ those. Thereby it is that Le
Secret leaves one nothing to apply, by reflection, and by way of
illustration, to one's sense of life in general, but is just a barren
little instance, little limited monstrosity, as curious and vivid as you
like, but with no moral or morality, good old word, at all involved in
it, or projected out of it as an interest. Hence the so _unfertilised_
state in which the mutual relations are left! Thereby it's only
theatrically, as distinguished from dramatically, interesting, I think;
even if it be after that fashion more so, more just theatrically
valuable, than anything else of Bernstein's. For _him_ it may count as
almost superior! And beautifully done, all round, yes--save in the
matter of the fat blonde whose after all pretty recent lapse one has to
take so comfortably and sympathetically for granted. However, if she had
been more sylph-like and more pleasing she wouldn't seem to have been
paying for her past at the rate demanded; and if she had been any way
different, in short, would have appeared to know, and to have previously
known, too much what she was about to be pathetic enough, victim enough.
What a pull the French do get for their drama-form, their straight swift
course, by being able to postulate such ladies, for interest, sympathy,
edification even, with such a fine absence of what we call explaining!
But this is all now: I must post it on the jump. Do try to put in a few
hours in town at some time or other before I go; and believe me yours
all faithfully,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Hugh Walpole._


/*
Lamb House, Rye,
Aug: 21: 13.
*/

...Beautiful must be your Cornish land and your Cornish sea, idyllic
your Cornish setting, like this flattering, this wonderful summer, and
ours here doubtless may claim but a modest place beside it all. Yet as
you have with you your Mother and Sister, which I am delighted to hear
and whom I gratefully bless, so I can match them with my nephew and
niece (the former with me alas indeed but for these 10 or 12 days,) who
are an extreme benediction to me. My niece, a charming and interesting
young person and _most_ conversable, stays, I hope, through the greater
part of September, and I even curse that necessary limit--when she
returns to America.... I like exceedingly to hear that your work has got
so bravely on, and envy you that sovereign consciousness. When it's
finished--well, when it's finished let some of those sweet young people,
the _bons amis_ (yours), come to me for the small change of remark that
I gathered from you the other day (you were adorable about it) they have
more than once chinked in your ear as from my poor old pocket, and they
will see, _you_ will, in what coin I shall have paid them. I too am
working with a certain shrunken regularity--when not made to lapse and
stumble by circumstances (damnably physical) beyond my control. These
circumstances tend to come, on the whole (thanks to a great power of
patience in my ancient organism,) rather _more_ within my management
than for a good while back; but to live with a bad and chronic anginal
demon preying on one's vitals takes a great deal of doing. However, I
didn't mean to write you of that side of the picture (save that it's a
large part of that same,) and only glance that way to make sure of your
tenderness even when I may seem to you backward and blank. It isn't to
exploit your compassion--it's only to be able to feel that I am not
without your fond understanding: so far as your blooming youth
(_there's_ the crack in the fiddle-case!) _can_ fondly understand my so
otherwise-conditioned age.... My desire is to stay on here as late into
the autumn as may consort with my condition--I dream of sticking on
through November even if possible: Cheyne Walk and the black-barged
yellow river will be the more agreeable to me when I get back to them. I
make out that you will then be in London again--I mean _by_ November,
though such a black gulf of time intervenes; and then of course I may
look to you to come down to me for a couple of days. It will be the
lowest kind of "jinks"--so halting is my pace; yet we shall somehow make
it serve. Don't say to me, by the way, à propos of jinks--the "high"
kind that you speak of having so wallowed in previous to leaving
town--that I ever challenge you as to _why_ you wallow, or splash or
plunge, or dizzily and sublimely soar (into the jinks element,) or
whatever you may call it: as if I ever remarked on anything but the
absolute inevitability of it for you at your age and with your natural
curiosities, as it were, and passions. It's good healthy exercise, when
it comes but in bouts and brief convulsions, and it's always a kind of
thing that it's good, and considerably final, to _have_ done. We must
know, as much as possible, in our beautiful art, yours and mine, what we
are talking about--and the only way to know is to have lived and loved
and cursed and floundered and enjoyed and suffered. I think I don't
regret a single "excess" of my responsive youth--I only regret, in my
chilled age, certain occasions and possibilities I didn't embrace. Bad
doctrine to impart to a young idiot or duffer, but in place for a young
friend (pressed to my heart) with a fund of nobler passion, the
preserving, the defying, the dedicating, and which always has the last
word; the young friend who can dip and shake off and go his straight way
again when it's time. But we'll talk of all this--it's absolutely late.
Who is D. H. Lawrence, who, you think, would interest me? Send him and
his book along--by which I simply mean Inoculate me, at your convenience
(don't address me the volume), so far as I can _be_ inoculated. I always
_try_ to let anything of the kind "take." Last year, you remember, a
couple of improbabilities (as to "taking") did worm a little into the
fortress. (Gilbert Cannan was one.) I have been reading over Tolstoi's
interminable _Peace and War_, and am struck with the fact that I now
protest as much as I admire. He doesn't _do_ to read over, and that
exactly is the answer to those who idiotically proclaim the impunity of
such formless shape, such flopping looseness and such a denial of
composition, selection and style. He has a mighty fund of life, but the
_waste_, and the ugliness and vice of waste, the vice of a not finer
_doing_, are sickening. For me he makes "composition" throne, by
contrast, in effulgent lustre!

/*
Ever your fondest of the fond,
H. J.
*/




_To Mrs. Archibald Grove._


/*
Lamb House, Rye.

August 22nd, 1913.
*/

/*
My dear Kate Grove,
*/

Please don't measure by my not-to-be-avoided delay (of three or four--or
five, days) to acknowledge it, the degree of pleasure and blest relief
your most kind letter represents for me. I have fallen these last years
on evil days, physically speaking, and have to do things only when and
as I rather difficultly _can_, and not after a prompter fashion. But you
give me a blest _occasion_, and I heartily thank you for it. Ever since
that so pleasant meeting of ours in Piccadilly toward the end of
1909--nearly four long years ago--have I been haunted with the dreadful
sense of a debt to your benevolence that has remained woefully
undischarged. I came back to this place that same day--of our happy
encounter--to be taken on the morrow with the preliminaries of a
wretched illness that dismally developed, that lasted _actively_, in
short, for two long years, and that has left me for the rest of my
ancient days much compromised and disqualified (though I should be
better of some of it all now--I mean _betterer_!--if I weren't so much
older--or olderer!) However, the point is that just as I had begun, on
that now far-off occasion, to take the measure of what was darkly before
me--that is had been clapped into bed by my Doctor here and a nurse
clapped down beside me (the first of a perfect procession)--I heard from
you in very kind terms, asking me to come and see you and Archibald in
the country--probably at the Pollards inscribed upon your present
letter. Well, I couldn't so much as make you a _sign_--my correspondence
had so utterly gone to pieces on the spot. Little by little in the
aftertime I picked up _some_ of those pieces--others are forever
scattered to the winds--and this particular piece you see I am picking
up now, with a slight painful contortion, only after this lapse of the
years! It is too strange and too graceless--or would be so if _you_
hadn't just put into it a grace for which, as I say, I can scarce
sufficiently thank you. The worst of such disasters and derelictions is
that they take such terrific retrospective explanations and that one's
courage collapses at all there is to tell, and so the wretched
appearance continues. However, I repeat, you have transformed it by
your generous condonation--you have helped me to tell you a small scrap
of my story. It was on your part a most beautiful inspiration, and I
bless my ponderous volume for its communication to you of the impulse.
Quite apart from this balm to my stricken conscience, I do rejoice that
the fatuous book has beguiled and interested you. I had pleasure in
writing it, but I delight in the liberality of your appreciation. But I
wish you had told me too something more of yourself and of Grove, more I
mean than that you are thus ideally amiable--which I already knew. Your
"we" has a comprehensive looseness, and I should have welcomed more dots
on the i's. Almost your only detail is that you were _here_ at some
comparatively recent hour (I infer,) and that you only gave my little
house a beautiful dumb glare and went your way again. Why do you do such
things?--they give you almost an air of exulting in them afterwards! If
I only had a magic "car" of my own I would jump into it tomorrow and
come over to see you at Crowborough--I _was_ there in that fashion, by
an afternoon lift from a friend, exactly a year ago. My brother
William's only daughter, a delightful young woman, and her eldest
brother, a most able and eminent young man, are with me at this time,
though _he_ too briefly, and demand of me, or receive from me, all the
attention my reduced energies are capable of in a social (so to speak)
and adventurous way, but if anything is possible later on I will do my
best toward it. I wish you were both conceivable at luncheon _here_. Do
ask yourselves candidly if you aren't--and make me the affirmative sign.
I should so like to see you. I recall myself affectionately to
Archibald--I think of the ancient wonders, images, scenes--all
fantasmagoric now. Yours and his all faithfully,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To William Roughead, W. S._

/#
     Mr. Roughead, at this time a stranger, had sent H. J. some
     literature of a kind in which he always took a keen interest--the
     literature of crime. The following refers to the gift of a
     publication of the Juridical Society of Edinburgh, dealing with
     trials of witches in the time of James I. Other volumes of the same
     nature followed, and the correspondence led to a valued friendship
     with the giver.
#/


/*
Lamb House, Rye.

August 24th, 1913.
*/

/*
Dear Mr. Roughead,
*/

I succumbed to your Witchery, that is I read your brave pages, the very
day they swam into my ken--what a pleasure, by the way, to hang over a
periodical page so materially handsome as that of which the Scots
members of your great profession "dispose"!--those at least who are
worthy. But face to face with my correspondence, and with my age (a
"certain," a very certain, age,) and some of its drawbacks, I am aware
of the shrunken nature of my poor old shrunken energies of response in
general (once fairly considerable;) and hence in short this little
delay. Of a horrible interest and a most ingenious vividness of
presentation is all that hideous business in your hands--with the
unspeakable King's figure looming through the caldron-smoke he kicks up
to more abominable effect than the worst witch images into which he so
fondly seeks to convert other people. He was truly a precious case and
quite the sort of one that makes us most ask how the time and place
concerned with him could at all stagger under him or successfully
stomach him. But the whole, the collective, state of mind and tissue of
horrors somehow fall outside of our measure and sense and exceed our
comprehension. The amenability of the victims, the wonder of what their
types and characters would at all "rhyme with" among ourselves today,
takes more setting forth than it can easily get--even as you figure it
or touch on it; and there are too many things (_in_ the amenability) as
to which one vainly asks one's self what they can too miserably have
_meant_. That is the flaw in respect to interest--that the "psychology"
of the matter fails for want of more intimate light in the given, in
_any_ instance. It doesn't seem enough to say that the wretched people
were amenable just to torture, or their torturers just to a hideous
sincerity of fear; for the selectability of the former must have rested
on some aspects or qualities that elude us, and the question of what
could pass for the latter as valid appearances, as verifications of the
imputed thing, is too abysmal. And the psychology of the loathsome James
(oh the Fortunes of Nigel, which Andrew Lang admired!) is of no use in
mere glimpses of his "cruelty," which explains nothing, or unless we get
it _all_ and really enter the horrid sphere. However, I don't want to do
that in truth, for the wretched aspects of the creature do a disservice
somehow to the so interesting and on the whole so sympathetic appearance
of his wondrous mother. That she should have had but one issue of her
body and that he should have had to be that particular mixture of all
the contemptibilities, "bar none," is too odious to swallow. Of course
he had a horrid papa--but he has always been retroactively compromising,
and my poor point is simply that he is the more so the more one looks at
him (as your rich page makes one do). But I insist too much, and all I
really wanted to say is: "Do, very generously, send me the sequel to
your present study--my appetite has opened to it too; but then go back
to the dear old human and sociable murders and adulteries and forgeries
in which we are so agreeably at home. And don't tell me, for charity's
sake, that your supply runs short!" I am greatly obliged to you for that
good information as to the accessibility of those modern cases--of which
I am on the point of availing myself. It's a kind of relief to me to
gather that the sinister Arran--I may take such visions too hard, but it
has been _made_ sinister to me--hasn't quite answered for you. Here we
have been having a wondrous benignant August--may you therefore have had
_some_ benignity. And may you not feel the least bit pressingly the pull
of this letter.

/*
Yours most truly,
HENRY JAMES.
*/

P. S. Only send me the next Juridical--and _then_ a wee word.




_To Mrs. William James._


/*
Lamb House, Rye.

August 28th, 1913.
*/

/*
Dearest Alice,
*/

Your Irving St. letter of the 16th has blessedly come, and Harry alas,
not so auspiciously, leaves me tomorrow on his way to sail from
Southampton on Saturday. But though it's very, _very_ late in the
evening (I won't tell you how late,) I want this hurried word to go
along with him, to express both my joy of hearing from you and my joy of
_him_, little as that is expressible. For how can I tell you what it is
for me in all this latter time that William's children, and your
children, should be such an interest, such a support and such a
benediction? Peggy and Harry, between them, will have crowned this
summer with ease and comfort to me, and I know how it will be something
of the same to you that they have done so.... It makes me think all the
while, as it must forever (you will feel, I well know) make _you_, of
what William's joy of him would have been--something so bitter rises at
every turn from everything that is good for us and that _he_ is out of.
I have shared nothing happy with the children these weeks (and there
have been, thank heaven, many such things) without finding that
particular shadow always of a sudden leap out of its lair. But why do I
speak to you of this as if I needed to and it weren't with you all the
while far more than it can be even with me? The only thing is that to
feel it and say it, unspeakable though one's tenderness be, is a sort of
dim propitiation of his ghost that hovers yearningly for us--doesn't
it?--at once so partakingly near and yet so far off in darkness!
However, I throw myself into the imagination that he may blessedly pity
_us_ far more than we can ever pity him; and the great thing is that
even our sense of _him_ as sacrificed only keeps him the more intensely
with us.... Good-night, dearest Alice.

/*
H. J.
*/




_To Howard Sturgis._


/*
Lamb House, Rye.

Sept: 2nd, 1913.
*/

/*
My dearest of all Howards,
*/

I long so for news of you that nothing but this act of aggression will
serve, and that even though I know (none better!) what a heavy, not to
say intolerable overburdening of illness is the request that those even
too afflicted to feed themselves shall feed the post with vivid accounts
of themselves. But though I don't in the least imagine that you are not
feeding yourself (I hope very regularly and daintily,) this is all the
same an irresistible surrender to sentiments of which you are the loved
object--downright crude affection, fond interest, uncontrollable
yearning. Look you, it isn't a _request_ for anything, even though I
languish in the vague--it's just a renewed "declaration"--of
dispositions long, I trust familiar to you and which my uncertainty
itself makes me want, for my relief, to reiterate. A vagueish (which
looks like _agueish_, but let the connection particularly forbid!) echo
of you came to me shortly since from Rhoda Broughton--more or less to
the effect that she believed you to be still in Scotland and still
nurse-ridden (which is _my_ rude way of putting it;) and this she took
for not altogether significant of your complete recovery of ease.
However, she is on occasion a rich dark pessimist--which is always the
more picturesque complexion; and she may that day but have added a more
artful touch to her cheek. I decline to believe that you are not rising
by gentle stages to a fine equilibrium unless some monstrous evidence
crowds upon me. I have myself little by little left such a weight of
misery behind me--really quite shaken off, though ever so slowly, the
worst of it, that slowness is to me no unfavouring argument at all, nor
is the fact of fluctuations a thing to dismay. One goes unutterably
roundabout, but still one goes--and so it is I have _come_. To where I
_am_, I mean; which is doubtless where I shall more or less stay. I can
_do_ with it, for want of anything grander--and it's comparative peace
and ease. It isn't what I wish _you_--for I wish and invoke upon you the
superlative of these benedictions, and indeed it would give me a good
shove on to the positive myself to know that _your_ comparative creeps
quietly forward. Don't _resent_ creeping--there's an inward joy in it at
its best that leaping and bounding don't know. And I'm sure you are
having it--even if you still _only_ creep--at its best. I live
snail-like here, and it's from my modest brown shell that I reach, oh
dearest Howard, ever so tenderly forth to you. I am having--absit
omen!--a very decent little summer. My quite admirable niece Peggy has
been with me for some weeks; she is to be so some three more, and her
presence is most soothing and supporting. (I can't stand stiff solitude
in the large black doses I once could.) ...

But good-night and take all my blessing--all but a scrap for William.
Yours, dearest Howard, so very fondly,

/*
H. J.
*/




_To Mrs. G. W. Prothero._

/#
     The "young man from Texas" was Mr. Stark Young, who had appealed to
     Mrs. Prothero for guidance in the study of H. J.'s books. H. J. was
     amused by the request, of which Mrs. Prothero told him, and
     immediately wrote the following.
#/


/*
Rye.
Sept 14th, 1913.
*/

This, please, for the delightful young man from Texas, who shews such
excellent dispositions. I only want to meet him half way, and I hope
very much he won't think I don't when I tell him that the following
indications as to five of my productions (splendid number--I glory in
the tribute of his appetite!) are all on the basis of the Scribner's (or
Macmillan's) collective and revised and prefaced edition of my things,
and that if he is not minded somehow to obtain access to _that_ form of
them, ignoring any others, he forfeits half, or much more than half, my
confidence. So I thus amicably beseech him--! I suggest to give him as
alternatives these two slightly different lists:

/*
1. Roderick Hudson.
2. The Portrait of a Lady.
3. The Princess Casamassima.
4. The Wings of the Dove.
5. The Golden Bowl.
*/

/*
1. The American.
2. The Tragic Muse.
3. The Wings of the Dove.
4. The Ambassadors.
5. The Golden Bowl.
*/

The second list is, as it were, the more "advanced." And when it comes
to the shorter Tales the question is more difficult (for characteristic
selection) and demands separate treatment. Come to me about that, dear
young man from Texas, later on--you shall have your little tarts when
you have eaten your beef and potatoes. Meanwhile receive this from your
admirable friend Mrs. Prothero.

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To H. G. Wells._

/#
     The following refers to Mr. Wells's novel, _The Passionate
     Friends_.
#/


/*
Lamb House, Rye.

September 21st, 1913.
*/

/*
My dear Wells,
*/

I won't take time to tell you how touched I freshly am by the constancy
with which you send me these wonderful books of yours--I am too
impatient to let you know _how_ wonderful I find the last. I bare my
head before the immense ability of it--before the high intensity with
which your talent keeps itself interesting and which has made me absorb
the so full-bodied thing in deep and prolonged gustatory draughts. I am
of my nature and by the effect of my own "preoccupations" a critical, a
_non-naïf_, a questioning, worrying reader--and more than ever so at
this end of time, when I jib altogether and utterly at the "fiction of
the day" and find no company but yours and that, in a degree, of one or
two others possible. To read a novel at all I perform afresh, to my
sense, the act of writing it, that is of re-handling the subject
according to my own lights and over-scoring the author's form and
pressure with my own vision and understanding of _the_ way--this, of
course I mean, when I see a subject in what he has done and feel its
appeal to me as one: which I fear I very often don't. This produces
reflections and reserves--it's the very measure of my attention and my
interest; but there's nobody who makes these particular reactions less
_matter_ for me than you do, as they occur--who makes the whole
apple-cart so run away that I don't care if I _don't_ upset it and only
want to stand out of its path and see it go. This is because you have so
positive a process and method of your own (rare and _almost_ sole
performer to this tune roundabout us--in fact absolutely sole by the
_force_ of your exhibition) that there's an anxious joy in seeing what
it does for you and with you. I find you perverse and I find you, on a
whole side, unconscious, as I can only call it, but my point is that
_with_ this heart-breaking leak even sometimes so nearly playing the
devil with the boat your talent remains so savoury and what you do so
substantial. I adore a rounded objectivity, a completely and patiently
achieved one, and what I mean by your perversity and your leak is that
your attachment to the autobiographic form for the _kind of thing_
undertaken, the whole expression of actuality, "up to date," affects me
as sacrificing what I hold most dear, a precious effect of
_perspective_, indispensable, by my fond measure, to beauty and
authenticity. Where there needn't so much be question of that, as in
your hero's rich and roaring impressionism, his expression of his own
experience, intensity and avidity as a whole, you are magnificent, there
your ability prodigiously triumphs and I grovel before you. This is the
way to take your book, I think--with Stratton's _own_ picture (I mean of
himself and _his_ immediate world felt and seen with such exasperated
and oh such simplified impatiences) as its subject exclusively. So taken
it's admirably sustained, and the life and force and wit and humour, the
imagination and arrogance and genius with which you keep it up, are
tremendous and all your own. I think this projection of Stratton's rage
of reflections and observations and world-visions is in its vividness
and humour and general bigness of attack, a most masterly thing to have
done. His South Africa etc. I think really sublime, and I can do
beautifully with _him_ and his 'ideas' altogether--he is, and they are,
an immense success. Where I find myself doubting is where I gather that
you yourself see your subject more particularly--and where I rather feel
it escape me. That is, to put it simply--for I didn't mean to draw this
out so much, and it's 2 o'clock a.m.!--the hero's prodigiously clever,
foreshortened, impressionising _report_ of the heroine and the relation
(which last is, I take it, for you, the subject) doesn't affect me as
the real vessel of truth about them; in short, with all the beauty you
have put into it--and much of it, especially at the last, is admirably
beautiful--I don't care a fig for the hero's report _as an account of
the matter_. You didn't mean a sentimental 'love story' I take it--you
meant ever so much more--and your way strikes me as _not_ the way to
give the truth about the woman of our hour. I don't think you _get_
her, or at any rate give her, and all through one hears your
remarkable--your wonderful!--reporting manner and voice (up to last
week, up to last night,) and not, by my persuasion, hers. In those
letters she writes at the last it's for me all Stratton, all masculinity
and intellectual superiority (of the most real,) all a more dazzling
journalistic talent than I observe any woman anywhere (with all respect
to the cleverness they exhibit) putting on record. It isn't in these
terms of immediate--that is of her pretended _own_ immediate irony and
own comprehensive consciousness, that I see the woman made real at all;
and by so much it is that I should be moved to take, as I say, such
liberties of reconstruction. But I don't in the least want to take them,
as I still more emphatically say--for what you _have_ done has held me
deliciously intent and made me feel anew with thanks to the great Author
of all things what an invaluable form and inestimable art it is! Go on,
go on and do it as you like, so long as you _keep_ doing it; your
faculty is of the highest price, your temper and your hand form one of
the choicest treasures of the time; my effusive remarks are but the sign
of my helpless subjection and impotent envy, and I am yours, my dear
Wells, all gratefully and faithfully,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Logan Pearsall Smith._

/#
     Mr. Pearsall Smith had sent H. J. the _Poems of Digby Mackworth
     Dolben_, the young writer whose rare promise was cut short by his
     accidental death in 1867. His poems were edited in 1918, with a
     biographical introduction, by Mr. Robert Bridges, a friend and
     contemporary of Dolben at Eton.
#/


/*
Lamb House, Rye.
October 27th, 1913.
*/

/*
My dear Logan,
*/

I thank you very kindly for the other bounties which have followed the
bounty of your visit--beginning with your vivid and charming letter, a
chronicle of such happy homeward adventure. I greatly enjoyed our so
long delayed opportunity for free discourse, and hold that any less
freedom would have done it no due honour at all. I like to think on the
contrary that we have planted the very standard of freedom, very firmly,
in my little oak parlour, and that it will hang with but comparative
heaviness till you come back at some favouring hour and help me to give
its folds again to the air. The munificence of your two little books I
greatly appreciate, and have promptly appropriated the very interesting
contents of Bridges' volume. (The small accompanying guide gives me more
or less the key to _his_ proper possessive.) The disclosure and picture
of the wondrous young Dolben have made the liveliest impression on me,
and I find his personal report of him very beautifully and tenderly, in
fact just perfectly, done. Immensely must one envy him the possession of
such a memory--recovered and re-stated, sharply rescued from the tooth
of time, after so many piled-up years. Extraordinarily interesting I
think the young genius himself, by virtue of his rare special gift, and
even though the particular preoccupations out of which it flowers,
their whole note and aspect, have in them for me something positively
antipathetic. Uncannily, I mean, does the so precocious and direct
avidity for all the paraphernalia of a complicated ecclesiasticism
affect me--as if he couldn't possibly have come to it, or, as we say,
gone for it, by experience, at that age--so that there is in it a kind
of implication of the insincere and the merely imitational, the cheaply
"romantic." However, he was clearly born with that spoon in his mouth,
even if he might have spewed it out afterwards--as one wonders immensely
whether he wouldn't. In fact that's the interest of him--that it's the
privilege of such a rare young case to make one infinitely wonder how it
might or mightn't have been for him--and Bridges seems to me right in
claiming that no _equally_ young case has ever given us ground for so
_much_ wonder (in the personal and aesthetic connection.) Would his
"ritualism" have yielded to more life and longer days and his quite
prodigious, but so closely associated, gift have yielded _with_ that (as
though indissolubly mixed with it)? Or would a big development of
inspiration and form have come? Impossible to say of course--and
evidently he could have been but most fine and distinguished whatever
should have happened. Moreover it is just as we have him, and as Bridges
has so scrupulously given him, that he so touches and charms the
imagination--and how instinctive poetic mastery was of the essence, was
the most rooted of all things, in him, a faculty or mechanism almost
abnormal, seems to me shown by the thinness of his letters compared with
the thickness and maturity of his verse. But how can one talk, and how
can he be anything but wrapped, for our delightful uncertainty, in the
silver mists of morning?--which one mustn't so much as want to breathe
upon too hard, much less clear away. They are an immense felicity to
him and leave him a most particular little figure in the great English
roll. I sometimes go to Windsor, and the very next one I shall
peregrinate over to Eton on the chance of a sight of his portrait.

/*
Yours all faithfully,

HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To C. Hagberg Wright._


/*
Lamb House, Rye.
Oct. 31st, 1913.
*/

/*
Very dear Hagberg--(Don't be alarmed--it's only _me_!)
*/

I have for a long time had it at heart to write to you--as to which I
hear you comment: Why the hell then didn't you? Well, because my poor
old _initiative_ (it isn't anything indecent, though it looks so) has
become in these days, through physical conditions, extremely impaired
and inapt--and when once, some weeks ago, I had let a certain very right
and proper moment pass, the very burden I should have to lift in the
effort to attenuate that delinquency seemed more formidable every time I
looked at it. This burden, or rather, to begin with, this delinquency,
lay in the fact of my neither having signed the appeal about the Russian
prisoners which you had sent me for the purpose with so noble and
touching a confidence, nor had the decency to write you a word of
attenuation or explanation. I _should_, I feel now, have signed it, for
_you_ and without question and simply because you asked it--against my
own private judgment in fact; for that's exactly the sort of thing I
should like to do for you--publicly and consciously make a fool of
myself: _as_ (even though I grovel before you _generally_ speaking) I
feel that signing would have amounted to my doing. I felt that at the
time--but also wanted just to oblige you--if oblige you it might! "Then
why the hell didn't you?" I hear you again ask. Well, again, very dear
Hagberg, because I was troubled and unwell--very, and uncertain--very,
and doomed for the time to drift, to bend, quite helplessly; letting the
occasion get so out of hand for me that I seemed unable to recover it or
get back to it. The more shame to me, I allow, since it wasn't a
question then of my initiative, but just of the responsive and the
accommodating: at any rate the question worried me and I weakly
temporised, meaning at the same time independently to write to you--and
then my disgrace had so accumulated that there was more to say about it
than I could tackle: which constituted the deterrent _burden_ above
alluded to. You will do justice to the impeccable chain of my logic, and
when I get back to town, as I now very soon shall (by the 15th--about--I
hope,) you will perhaps do even _me_ justice--far from impeccable though
I personally am. I mean when we can talk again, at our ease, in that
dear old gorgeous gallery--a pleasure that I shall at once seek to bring
about. One reason, further, of my graceless failure to try and tell you
why (why I was distraught about signing,) was that when I _did_ write I
wanted awfully to be able to propose to you, all hopefully, to come down
to me here for a couple of days (perhaps you admirably would have done
so;) but was in fact so inapt, in my then condition, for any decent or
graceful discharge of the office of host--thanks, as I say, to my
beastly physical consciousness--that it took all the heart out of me. I
am comparatively better now--but straining toward Carlyle Mansions and
Pall Mall. It was above all when I read your so interesting notice of
Tolstoy's Letters in the Times that I wanted to make you a sign--but
even that initiative failed. Please understand that nothing will induce
me to allow you to make the least acknowledgment of this. I shall be
horrified, mind you, if you take for me a grain of your so drained and
despoiled letter-energy. Keep whatever mercy I may look to you for till
we meet. I don't despair of melting you a little toward your
faithfullest

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Robert Bridges._

/#
     This continues the subject dealt with in the letter to Mr. Logan
     Pearsall Smith of Oct. 27, 1913.
#/


/*
Lamb House, Rye.
Nov. 7, 1913.
*/

/*
My dear Bridges,
*/

How delightful to hear from you in this generously appreciative way!--it
makes me very grateful to Logan for having reported to you of my
pleasure in your beautiful disclosure of young Dolben--which seems to me
such a happy chance for you to have had, in so effective conditions,
after so many years--I mean as by the production of cards from up your
sleeve. My impression of your volume was indeed a very lively one--it
gave me a really acute emotion to thank you for: which is a luxury of
the spirit quite rare and refreshing at my time of day. Your picture of
your extraordinary young friend suggests so much beauty, such a fine
young individual, and yet both suggests it in such a judging and, as one
feels, truth-keeping a way, that the effect is quite different from that
of the posthumous tribute to the early-gathered in general--it inspires
a peculiar confidence and respect. Difficult to do I can well imagine
the thing to have been--keeping the course between the too great claim
and the too timid; and this but among other complicated matters. I feel
however that there is need, in respect to the poor boy's note of
inspiration, of no shade of timidity at all--of so absolutely
distinguished a reality is that note, given the age at which it sounded:
such fineness of impulse and such fineness of art--one doesn't really at
all know where such another instance lurks--in the like condition. What
an interesting and beautiful one to have had such a near view of--in the
golden age, and to have been able to recover and reconstruct with such
tenderness--of the measured and responsible sort. How could you _not_
have had the emotion which, as you rightly say, can be such an
extraordinary (on occasion such a miracle-working) quickener of
memory!--and yet how could you not also, I see, feel shy of some of the
divagations in that line to which your subject is somehow formed rather
to lend itself! Your tone and tact seem to me perfect--and the rare
little image is embedded in them, so safely and cleanly, for
duration--which is a real "service, from you, to literature" and to our
sum of intelligent life. And you make one ask one's self just enough, I
think, what he would have _meant_ had he lived--without making us do so
too much. I don't quite see, myself, what he would have meant, and the
result is an odd kind of concurrence in his charming, flashing
catastrophe which is different from what most such accidents, in the
case of the young of high promise, make one feel. However, I do envy you
the young experience of your own, and the abiding sense of him in his
actuality, just as you had and have them, and your having been able to
intervene with such a light and final authority of taste and tenderness.
I say final because the little clear medallion will hang there exactly
as you have framed it, and your volume is the very condition of its
hanging. There should be _absolutely_ no issue of the poems without your
introduction. This is odd or anomalous considering what the best of them
are, bless them!--but it is exactly the best of them that most want it.
I hear the poor young spirit call on you out of the vague to stick to
him. But you always will.--I find myself so glad to be writing to you,
however, that I only now become aware that the small hours of the a.m.
are getting larger ...

/*
Yours all faithfully,

HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To André Raffalovich._

/#
     This refers to the gift of the _Last Letters of Aubrey Beardsley_,
     edited by Father Gray (1904).
#/


/*
Lamb House, Rye.
November 7th, 1913.
*/

/*
Dear André Raffalovich,
*/

I thank you again for your letter, and I thank you very kindly indeed
for the volume of Beardsley's letters, by which I have been greatly
touched. I knew him a little, and he was himself to my vision touching,
and extremely individual; but I hated his productions and thought them
extraordinarily base--and couldn't find (perhaps didn't try enough to
find!) the formula that reconciled this baseness, aesthetically, with
his being so perfect a case of the artistic spirit. But now the personal
spirit in him, the beauty of nature, is disclosed to me by your letter
as wonderful and, in the conditions and circumstances, deeply pathetic
and interesting. The amenity, the intelligence, the patience and grace
and play of mind and of temper--how charming and individual an
exhibition!...And very right have you been to publish the letters, for
which Father Gray's claim is indeed supported. The poor boy remains
quite one of the few distinguished images on the roll of young English
genius brutally clipped, a victim of victims, given the vivacity of his
endowment. I am glad I have three or four very definite--though one of
them rather disconcerting--recollections of him.

Very curious and interesting your little history of your migration to
Edinburgh--on the social aspect and intimate identity of which you must,
I imagine, have much gathered light to throw ... And you are still young
enough to find La Province meets your case too. It is because I am now
so very far from that condition that London again (to which I return on
the 20th) has become possible to me for longer periods: I am so old that
I have shamelessly to simplify, and the simplified London that in the
hustled and distracted years I vainly invoked, has come round to me
easily now, and fortunately meets my case. I shall be glad to see you
there, but I _won't_--thank you, no!--come to meat with you at
Claridge's. One doesn't go to Claridge's if one simplifies. I am obliged
now absolutely _never_ to dine or lunch out (a bad physical ailment
wholly imposes this:) but I hope you will come to luncheon with _me_,
since you have free range--on very different vittles from the Claridge,
however, if you can stand that. I count on your having still more then
to tell me, and am yours most truly,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Henry James, junior_

/#
     In quoting some early letters of William James's in _Notes of a Son
     and Brother_, H.J. had not thought it necessary to reproduce them
     with absolutely literal fidelity. The following interesting account
     of his procedure was written in answer to some queries from his
     nephew on the subject.
#/


/*
Lamb House, Rye.
November 15th-18th, 1913.
*/

/*
Dearest Harry,
*/

...It is very difficult, and even pretty painful, to try to put forward
after the fact the considerations and emotions that have been intense
for one in the long ferment of an artistic process: but I must
nevertheless do something toward making you see a little perhaps how ...
the editing of those earliest things other than "rigidly" had for me a
sort of exquisite inevitability. From the moment of those of my weeks in
Cambridge of 1911 during which I began, by a sudden turn of talk with
your Mother, to dally with the idea of a "Family Book," this idea took
on for me a particular light, the light which hasn't varied, through all
sorts of discomfitures and difficulties--and disillusionments, and in
which in fact I have put the thing through. That turn of talk was the
germ, it dropped the seed. Once when I had been "reminiscing" over some
matters of your Dad's and my old life of the time previous, far
previous, to her knowing us, over some memories of our Father and Mother
and the rest of us, I had moved her to exclaim with the most generous
appreciation and response, "Oh Henry, why don't you _write_ these
things?"--with such an effect that after a bit I found myself wondering
vaguely whether I _mightn't_ do something of the sort. But it dated from
those words of your Mother's, which gave me the impulse and determined
the spirit of my vision--a spirit and a vision as far removed as
possible from my mere isolated documentation of your Father's record. We
talked again, and still again, of the "Family Book," and by the time I
came away I felt I had somehow found my inspiration, though the idea
could only be most experimental, and all at the mercy of my putting it,
perhaps defeatedly, to the proof. It was such a very special and
delicate and discriminated thing to do, and only governable by
proprieties and considerations all of its own, as I should evidently, in
the struggle with it, more and more find. This is what I did find above
all in coming at last to work these Cambridge letters into the whole
harmony of my text--the general purpose of which was to be a reflection
of all the amenity and felicity of our young life of that time at the
highest pitch that was consistent with perfect truth--to show us all at
our best for characteristic expression and colour and variety and
everything that would be charming. And when I laid hands upon the
letters to use as so many touches and tones in the picture, I frankly
confess I seemed to see them in a better, or at all events in another
light, here and there, than those rough and rather illiterate copies I
had from you showed at their face value. I found myself again in such
close relation with your Father, such a revival of relation as I hadn't
known since his death, and which was a passion of tenderness for doing
the best thing by him that the material allowed, and which I seemed to
feel him in the room and at my elbow asking me for as I worked and as he
listened. It was as if he had said to me on seeing me lay my hands on
the weak little relics of our common youth, "Oh but you're not going to
give me away, to hand me over, in my raggedness and my poor accidents,
quite unhelped, unfriendly: you're going to do the very best for me you
_can_, aren't you, and since you appear to be making such claims for me
you're going to let me seem to justify them as much as I possibly may?"
And it was as if I kept spiritually replying to this that he might
indeed trust me to handle him with the last tact and devotion--that is
do with him everything I seemed to feel him _like_, for being kept up to
the amenity pitch. These were small things, the very smallest, they
appeared to me all along to be, tiny amendments in order of words,
degrees of emphasis &c., to the end that he should be more easily and
engagingly readable and thereby more tasted and liked--from the moment
there was no excess of these _soins_ and no violence done to his real
identity. Everything the letters meant affected me so, in all the
business, as of _our_ old world only, mine and his alone together, with
every item of it intimately known and remembered by me, that I daresay I
did instinctively regard it at last as all _my_ truth, to do what I
would with.... I have to the last point the instinct and the sense for
fusions and interrelations, for framing and encircling (as I think I
have already called it) every part of my stuff in every other--and that
makes a danger when the frame and circle play over too much upon the
image. Never again shall I stray from my proper work--the one in which
that danger is the reverse of one and becomes a rightness and a
beauty....

I may mention however that your exception that particularly caught my
eye--to "poor old Abraham" for "poor old Abe"--was a case for change
that I remember feeling wholly irresistible. Never, never, under our
Father's roof did we talk of Abe, either _tout court_ or as "Abe
Lincoln"--it wasn't conceivable: Abraham Lincoln he was for us, when he
wasn't either Lincoln or Mr. Lincoln (the Western note and the
popularization of "Abe" were quite away from us _then_:) and the form of
the name in your Dad's letter made me reflect how off, how far off in
his queer other company than ours I must at the time have felt him to
be. You will say that this was just a reason for leaving it so--and so
in a sense it was. But I could _hear_ him say Abraham and couldn't hear
him say Abe, and the former came back to me as sincere, also graver and
tenderer and more like ourselves, among whom I couldn't imagine any
"Abe" ejaculation under the shock of his death as possible.... However,
I am not pretending to pick up any particular challenge to my appearance
of wantonness--I should be able to justify myself (_when_ able) only out
of such abysses of association, and the stirring up of these, for
vindication, is simply a strain that stirs up tears.

/*
Yours, dearest Harry, all affectionately,

HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Edmund Gosse._

/#
     The portrait of H. J. (together with the bust by Mr. Derwent Wood)
     had been on exhibition to the subscribers in Mr. Sargent's studio
     in Tite Street. The "slight flaw in the title" had been the
     accidental omission of the subscribers' names in the printed
     announcement sent to them, whereby the letter opened familiarly
     with "Dear"--without further formality. It was partly to repair the
     oversight that H. J. had "put himself on exhibition" each day
     beside the portrait.
#/


/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.
December 18th, 1913.
*/

/*
My dear Gosse,
*/

The exquisite incident in Tite Street having happily closed, I have
breathing time to thank you for the goodly Flaubert volume, which safely
arrived yesterday and which helps me happily out of my difficulty. You
shall receive it again as soon as I have made my respectful use of it.

The exhibition of the Portrait came to a most brilliant end to-day, with
a very great affluence of people. (There have been during the three days
an immense number.) It has been a great and charming success--I mean the
View has been; and the work itself acclaimed with an unanimity of
admiration and, literally, of _intelligence_, that I can intimately
testify to. For I really put myself on exhibition beside it, each of the
days, morning and afternoon, and the translation (a perfect Omar
Khayyam, _quoi!_) visibly left the original nowhere. I _attended_--most
assiduously; and can really assure you that it has been a most beautiful
and flawless episode. The slight original flaw (in the title) I sought
to bury under a mountain of flowers, till I found that it didn't in the
least do to "explain it away," as every one (like the dear Ranee) said:
they exclaimed too ruefully "Ah, don't tell me you didn't _mean_ it!"
After which I let it alone, and speedily recognised that it was really
_the_ flower--even if but a little wayward wild flower!--of our success.
I am pectorally much spent with affability and emissions of voice, but
as soon as the tract heals a little I shall come and ask to be heard in
your circle. Be meanwhile at great peace and ease, at perfect rest about
everything.

/*
Yours all faithfully,

HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Bruce L. Richmond._

/#
     The projected article on "The New Novel" afterwards appeared in two
     numbers of the _Times Literary Supplement_, and was reprinted in
     _Notes on Novelists_.
#/


_Dictated._

/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.
December 19th, 1913.
*/

/*
Dear Bruce Richmond,
*/

Your good letter of a day or two ago is most interesting and suggestive
and puts to me as lucidly as possible the questions with which the
appearance of my so copious George Sand is involved. I have been turning
the matter earnestly over, and rather think I had best tell you now at
once in what form it presses on myself. This forces me to consider it in
a particular light. It has come up for me that I shall be well advised
(from my own obscure point of view!) to collect into a volume and
publish at an early date a number of ungathered papers that have
appeared here and there during the last fifteen years; these being
mainly concerned with the tribe of the Novelists. This involves my
asking your leave to include in the Book the article on Balzac of a few
months ago, and my original idea was that if the G.S. should appear in
the Supplement at once, you would probably authorize my reprinting _it_
also after a decent little interval. As the case stands, and as I so
well understand it on your showing--the case for the Supplement I
mean--I am afraid that I shall really _need_ the G.S. paper for the
Volume before you will have had time to put it forth at your entire
convenience--the only thing I would have wished you to consider. What
should you say to my withdrawing the paper in question from your
indulgent hands, and--as the possibility glimmers before me--making you
a compensation in the way of something addressed with greater actuality
and more of a certain current significance to the Spring Fiction Number
that you mention? (The words, you know, if you can forgive my
irreverence--I divine in fact that you share it!--somehow suggest
competition with a vast case of plate-glass "window-dressing" at
Selfridge's!) The G.S. isn't really a very fit or near thing for the
purpose of such a number: that lady is as a fictionist too superannuated
and rococo at the present time to have much bearing on any of those
questions pure and simple. My article really deals with her on quite a
different side--as you would see on coming to look into it. Should you
kindly surrender it to me again I would restore to it four or five pages
that I excised in sending it to you--so monstrously had it rounded
itself!--and make it thereby a still properer thing for my Book, where
it would add itself to two other earlier studies of the same subject, as
the Balzac of the Supplement will likewise do. And if you ask me what
you then gain by your charming generosity I just make bold to say that
there looms to me (though I have just called it glimmering) the
conception of a paper really _related_ to our own present ground and
air--which shall gather in several of the better of the younger
generation about us, some half dozen of whom I think I can make out as
treatable, and try to do under _their_ suggestion something that may be
of real reference to our conditions, and of some interest about them or
help for them.... Do you mind my going so far as to say even, as a
battered old practitioner, that I have sometimes yearningly wished I
might intervene a little on the subject of the Supplement's Notices of
Novels--in which, frankly, I seem to have seen, often, so many occasions
missed! Of course the trouble is that all the books in question, or
most of them at least, are such wretchedly poor occasions in themselves.
If it hadn't been for this I think I should have two or three times
quite said to you: "Won't you let _me_ have a try?" But when it came to
considering I couldn't alas, probably, either have read the books or
pretended to give time and thought to them. It is in truth only because
I half persuade myself that there are, as I say, some half a dozen
_selectable_ cases that the possibility hovers before me. Will you
consider at your leisure the plea thus put? I shouldn't want my paper
back absolutely at once, though in the event of your kindly gratifying
me I should like it before very long.

I am really working out a plan of approach to your domicile in the
conditions most favourable to my seeing you as well as Elena, and it
will in due course break upon you, if it doesn't rather take the form of
my trying to drag you both hither!

/*
Believe me all faithfully yours,

HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Hugh Walpole._


/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.
Jan. 2, 1914.
*/

...I have just despatched your inclosure to P. L. at _I, Dorotheergasse
6, Vienna_; an address that I recommend your taking a note of; and I
have also made the reflection that the fury, or whatever, that Edinburgh
inspires you with ought, you know, to do the very opposite of drying up
the founts of your genius in writing to me--since you say your letter
would have been other (as it truly might have been longer) didn't you
suffer so from all that surrounds you. That's the very _most_ juvenile
logic possible--and the juvenility of it (which yet in a manner touches
me) is why I call you retrogressive--by way of a long stroke of
endearment. _There_ was exactly an admirable matter for you to write me
_about_--a matter as to which you are strongly and abundantly feeling;
and in a relation which lives on communication as ours surely should,
and would (save for starving,) such occasions fertilise. However, of
course the terms are easy on which you extract communication from me,
and always have been, and always will be--so that there's doubtless a
point of view from which your reservations (another fine word) are quite
right. I'm glad at any rate that you've been reading Balzac (whose
"romantic" side _is_ rot!) and a great contemporary of your own even in
his unconsidered trifles. _I've_ just been reading Compton Mackenzie's
_Sinister Street_ and finding in it an unexpected amount of talent and
life. Really a very interesting and remarkable performance, I think, in
spite of a considerable, or large, element of waste and
irresponsibility--_selection_ isn't in him--and at one and the same time
so extremely young (he too) and so confoundingly mature. It has the
feature of improving so as it goes on, and disposes me much to read, if
I can, its immediate predecessor. You must tell me again what you know
of him (I've forgotten what you _did_ tell me, more or less,) but in
your own good time. I think--I mean I blindly feel--I should be _with_
you about Auld Reekie--which somehow hasn't a right to be so handsome.
But I long for illustrations--at your own good time. We have emerged
from a very clear and quiet Xmas--quiet for _me_, save for rather a
large assault of correspondence. It weighs on me still, so this is what
I call--and you will too--very brief.... I wish you the very decentest
New Year that ever was. Yours, dearest boy, all affectionately,

/*
H. J.
*/




_To Compton Mackenzie._


/#
     It will be recalled that Edward Compton, Mr. Mackenzie's father,
     had played the part of Christopher Newman in H.J.'s play _The
     American_, produced in 1891.
#/


/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.
Jan. 21, 1914.
*/

/*
My dear "Monty Compton!"--
*/

For that was, I think, as I first heard you named--by a worthy old
actress of your father's company who, when we were rehearsing The
American in some touring town to which I had gone for the purpose,
showed me with touching elation a story-book she had provided for you on
the occasion of your birthday. That story-book, weighted with my
blessing on it, evidently sealed your vocation--for the sharpness of my
sense that you are really a prey to the vocation was what, after reading
you, I was moved to emphasise to Pinker. I am glad he let you know of
this, and it gives me great pleasure that you have written to me--the
only abatement of which is learning from you that you are in such
prolonged exile on grounds of health. May that dizzying sun of Capri
cook every peccant humour out of you. As to this untowardness I mean,
frankly, to inquire of your Mother--whom I am already in communication
with on the subject of going to see her to talk about you! For that, my
dear young man, I feel as a need: with the force that I find and so much
admire in your talent your _genesis_ becomes, like the rest of it,
interesting and remarkable to me; you are so rare a case of the _kind_
of reaction from the theatre--and from so _much_ theatre--and the
reaction in itself is rare--as seldom taking place; and when it does it
is mostly, I think, away from the arts altogether--it is violent and
utter. But your pushing straight through the door into literature and
then closing it so tight behind you and putting the key in your pocket,
as it were--that strikes me as unusual and brilliant! However, it isn't
to go into all that that I snatch these too few minutes, but to thank
you for having so much arrested my attention, as by the effect of
Carnival and Sinister Street, on what I confess I am for the most part
(as a consequence of some thankless experiments) none too easily
beguiled by, a striking exhibition by a member of the generation to
which you belong. When I wrote to Pinker I had only read S.S., but I
have now taken down Carnival in persistent short draughts--which is how
I took S.S. and is how I take anything I take at all; and I have given
myself still further up to the pleasure, quite to the emotion, of
intercourse with a young talent that really moves one to hold it to an
account. Yours strikes me as very living and real and sincere, making me
care for it--to anxiety--care above all for what shall become of it. You
ought, you know, to do only some very fine and ripe things, really solid
and serious and charming ones; but your dangers are almost as many as
your aspects, and as I am a mere monster of _appreciation_ when I
read--by which I mean of the critical passion--I would fain lay an
earnest and communicative hand on you and hypnotize or otherwise bedevil
you into proceeding as I feel you most _ought_ to, you know. The great
point is that I would so fain personally see you--that we may talk; and
I do very much wish that you _had_ given me a chance at one of those
moments when you tell me you inclined to it, and then held off. You are
so intelligent, and it's a blessing--whereby I prefigure it as a luxury
to have a go at you. I am to be in town till the end of June--I
_hibernate_ no more at Rye; and if you were only to turn up a little
before that it would be excellent. Otherwise you must indeed come to me
there. I wish you all profit of all your experience, some of it lately,
I fear, rather harsh, and all experience of your genius--which I also
wish myself. I _think_ of Sinister Street II, and am yours most truly,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To William Roughead, W.S._

/#
     Mr. Roughead had sent H. J. his edition of the trial of Mary
     Blandy, the notable murderess, who was hung in 1752 for poisoning
     her father.
#/


/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.
January 29th, 1914.
*/

/*
Dear Mr. Roughead,
*/

I devoured the tender Blandy in a single feast; I thank you most kindly
for having anticipated so handsomely my appetite; and I highly
appreciate the terms in general, and the concluding ones in particular,
in which you serve her up. You tell the story with excellent art and
animation, and it's quite a gem of a story in its way, History herself
having put it together as with the best compositional method, a strong
sense for sequences and the proper march, order and _time_. The only
thing is that, as always, one wants to know _more_, more than the mere
evidence supplies--and wants it even when as in this case one feels that
the people concerned were after all of so dire a simplicity, so
primitive a state of soul and sense, that the exhibition they make tells
or expresses about all there was of them. Dear Mary must have consisted
but of two or three pieces, one of which was a strong and simple carnal
affinity, as it were, with the stinking little Cranstoun. Yet, also, one
would like to get a glimpse of how an apparently normal young woman of
her class, at that period, could have viewed such a creature in such a
light. The light would throw itself on the Taste, the sense of
proportion, of the time. However, dear Mary was a clear barbarian,
simply. Enfin!--as one must always wind up these matters by exhaling. I
continue to have escaped a further sense of ---- and as I think I
have told you I cultivate the exquisite art of ignorance. Yet not of
Blandy, Pritchard and Co.--_there_, perversely, I am all for knowledge.
Do continue to feed in me that languishing need, and believe me all
faithfully yours,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Mrs. Wharton._

/#
     The two novels referred to in the following are M. Marcel Proust's
     _Du Côté de chez Swann_ and M. Abel Bonnard's _La Vie et l'Amour_.
#/


/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.
February 25th, 1914.
*/

/*
Dearest Edith,
*/

The nearest I have come to receipt or possession of the interesting
volumes you have so generously in mind is to have had _Bernstein's_
assurance, when I met him here some time since, that _he_ would give
himself the delight of sending me the Proust production, which he
learned from me that I hadn't seen. I tried to dissuade him from this
excess, but nothing would serve--he was too yearningly bent upon it, and
we parted with his asseveration that I might absolutely count on this
tribute both to poor Proust's charms and to my own. But depuis lors--!
he has evidently been less "en train" than he was so good as to find
_me_. So that I shall indeed be "very pleased" to receive the "Swann"
and the "Vie et l'Amour" from you at your entire convenience. It is
indeed beautiful of you to think of these little deeds of kindness,
little words of love (or is it the other way round?) What I want above
all to thank you for, however, is your so brave backing in the matter of
my disgarnished gums. That I am doing right is already unmistakeable. It
won't make me "well"; nothing will do that, nor do I complain of the
muffled miracle; but it will make me mind less being ill--in short it
will make me better. As I say, it has already done so, even with my
sacrifice for the present imperfect--for I am "keeping on" no less than
eight pure pearls, in front seats, till I can deal with them in some
less exposed and exposing conditions. Meanwhile tons of implanted and
domesticated gold &c (one's caps and crowns and bridges being _most_
anathema to Des Voeux, who regards them as so much installed metallic
poison) have, with everything they fondly clung to, been, less visibly,
eradicated; and it is enough, as I say, to have made a marked difference
in my felt state. That is the point, for the time--and I spare you
further details....

/*
Yours de coeur,

HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Dr. J. William White._


_Dictated._

/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.
March 2nd, 1914.
*/

/*
My dear J. William,
*/

I won't pretend it isn't an aid and comfort to me to be able to thank
you for your so brilliant and interesting overflow from Sumatra in this
mean way--since from the point of view of such a life as you are
leading nothing I could possibly do in my poor sphere and state would
seem less mean than anything else, and I therefore might as well get the
good of being legible. I am such a votary and victim of the single
impression and the imperceptible adventure, picked up by accident and
cherished, as it were, in secret, that your scale of operation and
sensation would be for me the most choking, the most fatal of
programmes, and I should simply go ashore at Sumatra and refuse ever to
fall into line again. But that is simply my contemptible capacity, which
doesn't want a little of five million things, but only requires [much]
of three or four; as to which _then_, I confess, my requirements are
inordinate. But I am so glad, for the world and for themselves, above
all for you and Letitia, that many great persons, and especially you
two, are constructed on nobler lines, with stouter organs and longer
breaths, to say nothing of purses, that I don't in the least mind your
doing such things if _you_ don't; and most positively and richly enjoy
sitting under the warm and fragrant spray of the enumeration of them.
Keep it up therefore, and don't let me hear of your daring to skip a
single page, or dodge a single prescription, of the programme and the
dose!...

I am signing, with J. S. S., three hundred very fine photographs of the
Portrait, ever so much finer still, that he did of me last summer, and
which I think you know about--in order that they be sent to my friends,
of whom you are not the least; so that you will find one in Rittenhouse
Square on your return thither, if with the extraordinarily dissipated
life you lead you do really get back. With it will wait on you probably
this, which I hope won't be sent either to meet or to follow you; I
really can't even to the extent of a letter personally participate in
your dissipation while it's at its worst. How embarrassed poor Letitia
must truly be, if she but dared to confess it, at finding herself so
associated; for that is not _her_ nature; _my_ life here, had she but
consented to share it, would be so much more congruous with _that_! I
don't quite gather when you expect to reach these shores--since my brain
reels at the thought of your re-embarking for them after you reach your
own at the climax of your orgy. I realise all that these passions are
capable of leading you on to, and therefore shall not be surprised if
you do pursue them without a break--shall in fact even be delighted to
think I may see you gloriously approach by just sitting right here at
this window, which commands so the prospect. But goodbye, dear good
friends; gather your roses while ye may and _don't_ neglect this
blighted modest old bud, your affectionate friend,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Henry Adams._

/#
     The book sent to Mr. Adams was _Notes of a Son and Brother_, now
     just published.
#/


/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.
March 21, 1914.
*/

/*
My dear Henry,
*/

I have your melancholy outpouring of the 7th, and I know not how better
to acknowledge it than by the full recognition of its unmitigated
blackness. _Of course_ we are lone survivors, of course the past that
was our lives is at the bottom of an abyss--if the abyss _has_ any
bottom; of course, too, there's no use talking unless one particularly
_wants_ to. But the purpose, almost, of my printed divagations was to
show you that one _can_, strange to say, still want to--or at least can
behave as if one did. Behold me therefore so behaving--and apparently
capable of continuing to do so. I still find my consciousness
interesting--under _cultivation_ of the interest. Cultivate it _with_
me, dear Henry--that's what I hoped to make you do--to cultivate yours
for all that it has in common with mine. _Why_ mine yields an interest I
don't know that I can tell you, but I don't challenge or quarrel with
it--I encourage it with a ghastly grin. You see I still, in presence of
life (or of what you deny to be such,) have reactions--as many as
possible--and the book I sent you is a proof of them. It's, I suppose,
because I am that queer monster, the artist, an obstinate finality, an
inexhaustible sensibility. Hence the reactions--appearances, memories,
many things, go on playing upon it with consequences that I note and
"enjoy" (grim word!) noting. It all takes doing--and I _do_. I believe I
shall do yet again--it is still an act of life. But you perform them
still yourself--and I don't know what keeps me from calling your letter
a charming one! There we are, and it's a blessing that you understand--I
admit indeed alone--your all-faithful

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Mrs. William James._

/#
     "Minnie" is of course Mary Temple, the young cousin of old days
     commemorated in the last chapter of _Notes of a Son and Brother_.
#/


/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.
March 29th, 1914.
*/

/*
Dearest Alice,
*/

This is a Saturday a.m., but several days have come and gone since there
came to me your dear and beautiful letter of March 14th (considerably
about my "Notes,") and though the American post closes early I must get
off some word of recognition to you, however brief I have scramblingly
to make it. I hoped of course you would find in the book something of
what I difficultly tried to put there--and you have indeed, you have
found all, and I rejoice, because it was in talk with you in that
terrible winter of 1910-11 that the impulse to the whole attempt came to
me. Glad you will be to know that the thing appears to be quite
extraordinarily appreciated, absolutely acclaimed, here--scarcely any
difficulties being felt as to "parts that are best," unless it be that
the early passage and the final chapter about dear Minnie seem the
great, the beautiful "success" of the whole. What I have been able to do
for _her_ after all the long years--judged by this test of expressed
admiration--strikes me as a wondrous stroke of fate and beneficence of
time: I seem really to have (her letters and ---- 's and your
admirable committal of them to me aiding) made her emerge and live on,
endowed her with a kind dim sweet immortality that places and keeps
her--and I couldn't be at all sure that I was doing it; I was so anxious
and worried as to my really getting the effect in the right way--with
tact and taste and without overstrain....

I am counting the weeks till Peg swims into view again--so delightful
will it be to have her near and easily to commune with her, and above
all to get from her all that detail of the state of the case about you
all that I so constantly yearn for and that only talk can give. The one
shade on the picture is my fear that she will find the poor old Uncle
much more handicapped about _socially_ ministering to them (two young
women with large social appetites) than she is perhaps prepared to find
me. And yet after all she probably does take in that I have had to cut
my connections with society entirely. Complications and efforts with
people floor me, anginally, _on the spot_, and my state is that of
living every hour and at every minute on my guard. So I am anything but
the centre of an attractive circle--I am cut down to the barest
inevitabilities, and occupied really more than in any other way now in
simply saving my life. However, the blest child was witness of my
condition last summer, my letters have probably sufficiently reflected
it since--and I am really on a _better_ plane than when she was last
with me. To have her with me is a true support and joy, and I somehow
feel that with her admirable capacity to be interested in the near and
the characteristic, whatever these may be, she will have lots of
pleasant and informing experience and contact in spite of my inability
to "take her out" or to entertain company for her at home. She knows
this and she comes in all her indulgence and charity and generosity--for
the sake of the sweet good she can herself do _me_. And I rejoice that
she has Margaret P. with her--who will help and solidify and enrich the
whole scene. No. 3 will be all satisfactorily ready for them, and I have
no real fear but that they will find it a true bower of ease. The omens
and auspices seem to me all of the best.

The political atmosphere here is charged to explosion as it has never
been--what is to happen no man knows; but this only makes it a more
thrilling and spectacular world. The tension has never been so
great--but it will, for the time at least, ease down. The dread of
violence is shared all round. I am finishing this rather tiredly by
night--I couldn't get it off and have alas missed a post. But all love.

/*
Your affectionate

H. J.
*/




_To Arthur Christopher Benson._


/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.

April 21st, 1914.
*/

/*
My dear Arthur,
*/

What a delightful thing this still more interesting _extension_ of our
fortunate talk! I can't help being glad that you had second thoughts
(though your first affected me as good enough, quite, to need no better
ones,) since the result has been your rich and genial letter. The only
thing is that if your first thoughts were to torment (or whatever)
yourself, these supersessive rather torment _me_--by their suggestion
that there's still more to say yet--than you do say: as when you remark
that you ought either to have told me nothing about ---- or to have
told me all. "All" is precisely what I should have liked to have from
you--all in fact about everything!--and what a pity we can't appoint
another tea-hour for my making up that loss. You clearly live in these
years so much more in the current of life than I do that no one of your
impressions would have failed of a lively interest for me--and the more
we had been able to talk of ---- and his current, and even
of ---- and his, the more I should have felt your basis of
friendship in everything and the generosity of your relation to them. I
don't think we see anything, about our friends, unless we see all--so
far as in us lies; and there is surely no care we can so take for them
as to turn our mind upon them liberally. Don't turn yours too much upon
yourself for having done so. The virtue of that "ruder jostle" that you
speak of so happily is exactly that it shakes out more aspects and
involves more impressions, and that in fine you young people are
together in a way that makes vivid realities spring from it--I having
cognisance, in my ancient isolation, I well know, but of the more or
less edited, revised, not to say expurgated, creature. It's
inevitable--that is--for ancient isolation; but you're in the thick of
history and the air of it was all about you, and the records of it in
the precious casket that I saw you give in charge to the porter. So with
that, oh man of action, perpetually breaking out and bristling with
performances and seeing (and feeling) things on the field, I don't know
what you mean by the image of the toys given you to play with in a
corner--charming as the image is. It's the _corner_ I contest--you're in
the middle of the market-place, and I alter the figure to that of the
brilliant juggler acquitting himself to the admiration of the widest
circle amid a whirl of objects projected so fast that they can scarce be
recognised, but that as they fly round your head one somehow guesses to
be _books_, and one of which in fact now and again hits that of your
gaping and dazzled and all-faithful old spectator and friend,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Mrs. Humphry Ward._

/#
     The following is one of a large number of letters written in answer
     to condolences on the subject of the mutilation of his portrait, at
     this time hanging at the Royal Academy, by a militant
     "suffragette": who had apparently selected it for attack as being
     the most notable and valuable canvas in the exhibition.
#/

_Dictated_.

/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.

May 6th, 1914.
*/

/*
Dear and Illustrious Friend,
*/

I blush to acknowledge by this rude method the kindness that has
expressed itself on your part in your admirable heroic hand. But figure
me as a poor thing additionally impaired by the tomahawk of the savage,
and then further see me as breasting a wondrous high tide of postal
condolence in this doubly-damaged state. I am fairly driven to machinery
for expedition's sake. And let me say at once that I gather the sense of
the experts to be that my wounds are really curable--such rare secrets
for restoration can now be brought to bear! They are to be tried at any
rate upon Sargent's admirable work, and I am taking the view that they
_must_ be effective. As for our discomfort from _ces dames_, that is
another affair--and which leaves me much at a loss. Surely indeed the
good ladies who claim as a virtue for their sex that they can look an
artistic possession of that quality and rarity well in the face only to
be moved bloodily to smash it, make a strange appeal to the confidence
of the country in the _kind_ of character they shall bring to the
transaction of our affairs. Valuable to us that species of intelligence!
Precious to us that degree of sensibility! But I have just made these
reflections in very much these terms in a note to dear Anne Ritchie.
Postal pressure induces conversational thrift! However, I do indeed hope
to come to see you on Thursday, either a bit early or a bit late, and
shall then throw all thrift to the winds and be splendidly extravagant!
I dare say I shall make bold to bring with me my young niece (my brother
William's only daughter,) who is spending a couple of months near me
here; and possibly too a young relative of her own who is with her. Till
very soon then at the worst.

/*
Yours all faithfully,
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Thomas Sergeant Perry._

_Dictated._

/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.

May 17th, 1914.
*/

/*
My dear Thomas,
*/

As usual I groan gratefully under the multiplication of your bounties;
the last of these in particular heaping that measure up. Pardon the use
of this form to tell you so: there are times when I faint by the
wayside, and can then only scramble to my feet by the aid of the firm
secretarial crutch. I fall, physically, physiologically speaking, into
holes of no inconsiderable depth, and though experience shows me that I
can pretty well always count on scrambling out again, my case while at
the bottom is difficult, and it is from such a depth, as happens, that I
now address you: not wanting to wait till I _am_ above ground again, for
my arrears, on those emergences, are too discouraging to face. Lilla
wrote me gentle words on the receipt of the photograph of Sargent's
portrait, and now you have poured upon the wounds it was so deplorably
to receive the oil of your compassion and sympathy. I gather up duly and
gratefully those rich drops, but even while I stow them away in my best
reliquary am able to tell you that, quite extraordinarily, the
consummate restorer has been able to make the injuries good, desperate
though they at first seemed, and that I am assured (this by Sargent
himself) that one would never guess what the canvas has been through. It
goes back at once to the Academy to hang upon its nail again, and as
soon as it's in place I shall go and sneak a glance at it. I have feared
equally till now seeing it either wounded or doctored--that is in course
of treatment. Tell Lilla, please, for her interest, that the job will
owe its success apparently very much to the newness of the paint, the
whole surface more plastic to the manipulator's subtle craft than if it
had hardened with time, after the manner of the celebrated old things
that are really superior, I think, by their age alone. As I didn't paint
the picture myself I feel just as free to admire it inordinately as any
other admirer may be; and those are the terms in which I express myself.
I won't say, my dear Thomas, much more today. Don't worry about me on
any of these counts: I am on a distinctly better footing than this time
a year ago, and have worried through upwards of a twelve-month without
the convenience, by which I mean the deathly complication, of having to
see a Doctor. If I can but go on with that separation there will be hope
for me yet. I take you to be now in villeggiatura and preparing for the
irruption of your Nursery--which, however, with your vast safe
countryside to spread it over won't probably press on you to
smotheration. I remember getting the sense that Hancock would bear much
peopling. Plant it here and there with my affectionate thought, ground
fine and scattered freely, and believe me yours both all faithfully,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Mrs. Wharton._

/#
     The allusions in the following are to a motor-tour of Mrs.
     Wharton's in Algeria and Tunisia, and to an article by her in the
     _Times Literary Supplement_ on "The Criticism of Fiction."
#/


/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.

June 2nd, 1914.
*/

/*
Dearest Edith,
*/

Yes, I have been even to my own sense too long and too hideously
silent--small wonder that I should have learned from dear Mary Cadwal
therefore (here since Saturday night) that I have seemed to you not less
miserably so. Yet there has been all the while a certain sublime
inevitability in it--over and above those _general_ reactions in favour
of a simplifying and softening _mutisme_ that increase with my
increasing age and infirmity. I am able to go on only always plus
doucement, and when you are off on different phases of your great
world-swing the mere side-wind of it from afar, across continents and
seas, stirs me to wonderments and admirations, sympathies, curiosities,
intensities of envy, and eke thereby of _humility_, which I have to
check and guard against for their strain on my damaged organism. The
_relation_ thus escapes me--and I feel it must so escape you, drunk with
draughts of every description and immersed in visions which so utterly
and inevitably turn their back--or turn yours--on what one might one's
self have de mieux to vous offrir. The idea of tugging at you to make
you look round therefore--look round at these small sordidries and
poornesses, and thereby lose the very finest flash of the revelation
then and there organised for you or (the great thing!) _by_ you
perchance: that affects me ever as really consonant with no minimum even
of modesty or discretion on one's own account--so that, in fine, I have
simply lain stretched, a faithful old veteran slave, upon the door-mat
of your palace of adventure, sufficiently proud to give the alarm of any
irruption, should I catch it, but otherwise waiting till you should
emerge again, stepping over my prostrate form to do so. That gracious
act now performed by you--since I gather you to be back in Paris by this
speaking--I get up, as you see, to wish you the most affectionate and
devoted welcome home and tell you that I believe myself to have "kept"
in quite a sound and decent way, in the domestic ice-chest of your
absence. I mix my metaphors a little, comme toujours (or rather comme
jamais!) but the great thing is to feel you really within hail again and
in this air of my own poor little world, which isn't for me the
non-conductor (that's the real hitch when you're "off") of that of your
great globe-life. I won't try to ask you of this last glory now--for,
though the temperature of the ice-chest itself has naturally risen with
your nearer approximation, I still shall keep long enough, I trust, to
sit at your knee in some peaceful nook here and gather in the wondrous
tale. I have had echoes--even, in very faint and vague form, that of the
burglarious attempt upon you in the anonymous oriental city (vagueness
does possess me!)--but by the time my sound of indignant participation
would have reached you I took up my Lit. Supp. to find you in such force
over the subject you there treated, on that so happy occasion, that the
beautiful firmness and "clarity," even if not charity, of your nerves
and tone clearly gave the lie to any fear I should entertain for the
effect of your annoyance. I greatly admired by the same token the fine
strain of that critical voice from out the path of shade projected upon
the desert sand, as I suppose, by the silhouette of your camel.
Beautifully said, thought, felt, inimitably _jeté_, the paper has
excited great attention and admiration here--and is probably doing an
amount of missionary work in savage breasts that we shall yet have some
comparatively rude or ingenuous betrayal of. I do notice that the flow
of the little _impayables_ reviews meanders on--but enfin ne désespérons
pas.... But oh dear, I want to see you about everything--and am yours
all affectionately and not in the least patiently,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To William Roughead, W. S._

/#
     This and the next letter refer to further gifts in the literature
     of crime. Lord Justice Clerk Macqueen of Braxfield was of course
     the original of Stevenson's Weir of Hermiston.
#/


/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.

June 10th, 1914.
*/

/*
My dear Roughead,
*/

(Let me take a flying leap across the formal barrier!) You are the most
munificent of men as well as the most ingenious of writers, and my
modest library will have been extremely enriched by you in a department
in which it has been weak out of all proportion to the yearning
curiosity of its owner. I greatly appreciate your gift to me of the so
complete and pictorial Blandy volume--dreadfully informing as it is in
the whole contemporary connection--the documents are such good reporting
that they make the manners and the tone, the human and social note, live
after a fashion beside which our own general exhibition becomes more
soothing to my soul. Your summary of the Blandy trial strikes me afresh
as an admirable piece of foreshortening (of the larger quantities--now
that these are presented.) But how very good the reporting of cases
appears to have been capable of being all the same, in those
pre-shorthand days. I find your Braxfield a fine vivid thing--and the
pleasure of sense over the park-like page of the Juridical is a
satisfaction by itself; but I confess your hero most interests by the
fact that he so interested R. L. S., incurable yearning Scot that Louis
was. I am rather easily sated, in the direct way, with the mainly
"broad" and monotonously massive characters of that type, uncouth of
sound, and with their tendency to be almost stupidly sane. History never
does them--never _has_, I think--_in_adequate justice (you must help her
to that blandness here;) and it's all right and there they numerously
and soundly and heavily were and are. But they but renew, ever (when
reproduced,) my personal appetite--by reaction--for the handlers of the
fiddle-string and the fumblers for the essence. Such are my more natural
sneaking affinities. But keep on with them _all_, please--and continue
to beckon me along the gallery that I can't tread alone and where, by
your leave, I link my arm confraternally in yours: the gallery of
sinister perspective just stretches in this manner straight away. I am
delighted the photograph is to receive such honour--the original (I
don't mean _me_, but Sargent's improvement on me) is really magnificent,
and I, unimproved, am yours all truly,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To William Roughead, W. S._

/#
     Miss Madeleine Hamilton Smith, to whom the following refers, was
     tried on a charge of poisoning in 1857.
#/


/*
21 Carlyle Mansions,
Cheyne Walk, S.W.
June 16th, 1914.
*/

/*
My dear Roughead,
*/

Your offering is a precious thing and I am touched by it, but I am also
alarmed for the effect on your fortunes, your future, on those (and
that) who (and which) may, as it were, depend on you, of these gorgeous
generosities of munificence. The admirable Report is, as I conceive, a
high rarity and treasure, and I feel as if in accepting it I were
snatching the bread perhaps from the lips of unknown generations. Well,
I gratefully bow my head, but only on condition that it shall revert,
the important object and alienated heirloom, to the estate of my
benefactor on my demise. A strange and fortunate thing has
happened--your packet and letter found me this a.m. in the grip of an
attack of gout (the first for three or four years, and apparently not
destined to be very bad, with an admirable remedy that I possess at once
resorted to.) So I have been reclining at peace for most of the day with
my foot up and my eyes attached to the prodigious Madeleine. I have read
your volume straight through, with the extremity of interest and wonder.
It represents indeed the _type_, perfect case, with nothing to be taken
from it or added, and with the beauty that she precisely _didn't_
squalidly suffer, but lived on to admire with the rest of us, for so
many years, the rare work of art with which she had been the means of
enriching humanity. With what complacency must she not have regarded it,
through the long backward vista, during the time (now twenty years ago)
when I used to hear of her as, married and considered, after a long
period in Australia, the near neighbour, in Onslow Gardens, of my old
friends the Lyon Playfairs. They didn't know or see her (beyond the fact
of her being there,) but they tantalized me, because if it then made me
very, very old it now piles Ossa upon Pelion for me that I remember
perfectly her trial during its actuality, and how it used to come to us
every day in the Times, at Boulogne, where I was then with my parents,
and how they followed and discussed it in suspense and how I can still
see the queer look of the "not proven," seen for the first time, on the
printed page of the newspaper. I stand again with it, on the summer
afternoon--a boy of 14--in the open window over the Rue Neuve Chaussée
where I read it. Only I didn't know then of its--the case's--perfect
beauty and distinction, as you say. A singularly fine thing is this
report indeed--and a very magnificent the defence. She was truly a
portentous young person, with the _conditions_ of the whole thing
throwing it into such extraordinary relief, and yet I wonder all the
same at the verdict in the face of the so vividly attested, and so fully
and so horribly, sufferings of her victim. It's astonishing that the
evidence of what he went through that last night didn't do for her. And
what a pity she was almost of the pre-photographic age--I would give so
much for a veracious portrait of her _then_ face. To all of which
absolutely inevitable acknowledgment you are not to _dream_, please, of
responding by a single word. I shall take, I foresee, the liveliest
interest in the literary forger-man. How can we be sufficiently thankful
for these charming breaks in the sinister perspective? I rest my
telescope on your shoulder and am yours all faithfully,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Mrs. Alfred Sutro._

/#
     "L'Histoire" is George Sand's _Histoire de ma Vie_, sent by H. J.
     to Mrs. Sutro in preparation for her proposed visit to Nohant.
#/


/*
Lamb House, Rye.
July 28th, 1914.
*/

/*
Dear Mrs. Sutro,
*/

I rejoice to hear, by your liberal letter, that the pile of books held
together and have appeared, on reaching you, to make a decent show. Also
I'm very glad that it's come in your way to have a look at
Nohant--though I confess that I ask myself what effect the
_vulgarization_ of places, "scientifically" speaking, by free and easy
(and incessant) motor approach may be having on their once comparatively
sequestered genius. Well, that is exactly what you will tell me after
you have constaté the phenomenon in this almost best of all cases for
observing it. For Nohant _was_ so shy and remote--and Nohant must be now
(handed over to the State and the Public as their property) so very much
to the fore. _Do_ read L'Histoire at any rate first--that is
indispensable, and the _lecture_ of a facility! Yes, I am liking it very
much here in these beautiful midsummer coolnesses--though wishing _we_
weren't so losing our Bloom of mystery by the multitudinous assault.
However, I hug whatever provincial privacy we may still pretend to at
this hour of public uproar--so very horrible is the bear-garden of the
outer world to my sense, under these threatened convulsions. I cravenly
avert my eyes and stop my ears--scarcely turning round even for a look
at the Caillaux family. What a family and what a trial--and what a
suggestion for _us_, of complacent self-comparisons! I clutch at these
hungrily--in the great deficiency of other sources of any sort of
assurance for us. May we muddle through even now, though I almost
wonder if we deserve to! That doubt is why I bury my nose in my
rose-trees and my inkpot. What a judge of the play you will be becoming,
with the rate at which Alfred and his typist keep you supplied! Be sure
to see the little Nohant domestic theatre, by the way--and judge what a
part _it_ played in that discomfortable house. I long for the autumn
"run" when you will tell me all your impressions, and am yours all
faithfully,

/*
HENRY JAMES.
*/




_To Sir Claude Phillips._


/*
Lamb House, Rye.
July 31st, 1914.
*/

/*
My dear Claude,
*/

I can't not thank you on the spot for your so interesting and moving
letter, which reflects to me, relievingly in a manner, all the horror
and dismay in which I sit here alone. I mean that it eases off the
appalled sense a little to share that sickness with a fellow-victim and
be able to say a little of what presses on one. What one first feels
one's self uttering, no doubt, is but the intense unthinkability of
anything so blank and so infamous in an age that we have been living in
and taking for our own as if it were of a high refinement of
civilisation--in spite of all conscious incongruities; finding it after
all carrying this abomination in its blood, finding this to have been
what it _meant_ all the while, is like suddenly having to recognise in
one's family circle or group of best friends a band of murderers,
swindlers and villains--it's just a similar shock. It makes us wonder
whom in the world we are now to live with then--and even if with
everything publicly and internationally so given away we can live, or
want to live, at all. Very hideous to me is the behaviour of that
forsworn old pastor of his people, the Austrian Emperor, of whom, so
éprouvé and so venerable, one had supposed better things than so
interested and so cynical a chucking to the winds of all moral
responsibility. Infamous seem to me in such a light all the _active_
great ones of the earth, active for evil, in our time (to speak only of
that,) from the monstrous Bismarck down! But il s'agit bien to protest
in face of such a world--one can only possess one's soul in such dignity
as may be precariously achievable. Almost the worst thing is that the
dreadfulness, all of it, _may_ become interesting--to the blight and
ruin of our poor dear old cherished source of interest, and in spite of
one's resentment at having to live in such a way. With it all too is
indeed the terrible sense that the people of this country may well--by
some awful brutal justice--be going to get something bad for the
exhibition that has gone on so long of their huge materialized stupidity
and vulgarity. I mean the enormous national sacrifice to insensate
amusement, without a redeeming idea or a generous passion, that has kept
making one ask one's self, from so far back, how such grossness and
folly and blatancy could possibly _not_ be in the long run to be paid
for. The rate at which we may witness the paying may be prodigious--and
then no doubt one will pityingly and wretchedly feel that the
_intention_, after all, was never so bad--only the stupidity
constitutional and fatal. That is truly the dismal reflection, and on
which you touch, that if anything very bad does happen to the country,
there isn't anything like the French intelligence to react--with the
flannelled fool at the wicket, the muddied oaf and tutti quanti,
representing so much of our _preferred_ intelligence. However, let me
pull up with the thought that when I am reduced to--or have come
to--quoting Kipling for argument, there may be something the matter
with my conclusion. One can but so distressfully wait and so wonderingly
watch.

I am sorry to hear that the great London revelry and devilry (even if
you have had more of the side-wind than of the current itself) has left
you so consciously spent and sore. You can do with so much _more_ of the
current, at any rate, than I have ever been able to, that it affects me
as sad and wrong that that of itself shouldn't be something of a
guarantee. But if there must be more drawing together perhaps we shall
blessedly find that we can all more help each other. I quite see your
point in taking either the grand or the petty tour just now not at all
for granted, and greatly hope that if you circulate in this country some
fitful tide will bear you to this quarter--though I confess that when I
think of the _comparative_ public entertainment on which you would so
have to throw yourself I blush to beckon you on. I find myself quite
offensively complacent in the conditions about the established
simplicity of my own life--I've not "done" anything for so long, and
have been given over to such spareness and bareness, that I look
privation in the face as a very familiar friend.

/*
Yours all faithfully and fearfully,

HENRY JAMES.
*/
